THE ART OF WAR
By Sun Tzu
Translated with introduction and notes by
Lionel Giles, M.A.
19th May 2004
Contents
1 INTRODUCTION 4
1.1 Sun Wu and his Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.2 The Text of Sun Tzu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.3 The Commentators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
1.4 Appreciations of Sun Tzu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.5 Apologies for War . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2 LAYING PLANS 28
3 WAGING WAR 32
4 ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 36
5 TACTICAL DISPOSITIONS 42
6 ENERGY 46
7 WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 52
8 MANEUVERING 59
9 VARIATION IN TACTICS 68
10 THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 74
11 TERRAIN 85
12 THE NINE SITUATIONS 92
13 THE ATTACK BY FIRE 114
14 THE USE OF SPIES 120
1
CONTENTS 2
This Etext has been prepared and released by Project Gutenberg PROJECT GUTENBERG OFFICIAL
HOMESITE http://www.promo.net/pg/ . Re-editingandconversiontoL ATEXformatindependently
from Project Gutenberg and/or previous editors by Tomas Ukkonen 2004. This etext is a “public domain”
work. Editors disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses including legal fees, and YOU
HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF
WARRANTYORCONTRACT,INCLUDING,BUTNOTLIMITEDTOINDIRECT,CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGES.
CONTENTS 3
TomybrotherCaptainValentineGiles,R.G.inthehopethatawork2400
years old may yet contain lessons worth consideration by the soldier of
today this translation is affectionately dedicated.
Preface to the Project Gutenburg Etext
When Lionel Giles began his translation of Sun Tzu’s ART OF WAR, the work was
virtually unknown in Europe. Its introduction to Europe began in 1782 when a French
JesuitFatherlivinginChina,JosephAmiot,acquiredacopyofit,andtranslateditinto
French. It was not a good translation because, according to Dr. Giles, "[I]t contains a
great deal that Sun Tzu did not write, and very little indeed of what he did."
The ﬁrst translation into English was published in 1905 in Tokyo by Capt. E. F.
Calthrop, R.F.A. However, this translation is, in the words of Dr. Giles, "excessively
bad." He goes further in this criticism: "It is not merely a question of downright blun-
ders, from which none can hope to be wholly exempt. Omissions were frequent; hard
passages were willfully distorted or slurred over. Such offenses are less pardonable.
They would not be tolerated in any edition of a Latin or Greek classic, and a similar
standard of honesty ought to be insisted upon in translations from Chinese." In 1908
a new edition of Capt. Calthrop’s translation was published in London. It was an im-
provement on the ﬁrst – omissions ﬁlled up and numerous mistakes corrected – but
new errors were created in the process. Dr. Giles, in justifying his translation, wrote:
"It was not undertaken out of any inﬂated estimate of my own powers; but I could not
helpfeelingthatSunTzudeservedabetterfatethanhadbefallenhim,andIknewthat,
at any rate, I could hardly fail toimprove on the work of my predecessors."
Clearly, Dr. Giles’ work established much of the groundwork for the work of later
translatorswhopublishedtheirowneditions. OfthelatereditionsoftheARTOFWAR
I have examined; two feature Giles’ edited translation and notes, the other two present
the same basic information from the ancient Chinese commentators found in the Giles
edition. Ofthesefour,Giles’1910editionisthemostscholarlyandpresentsthereader
an incredible amount of information concerning Sun Tzu’s text, much more than any
other translation.
The Giles’ edition of the ART OF WAR, as stated above, was a scholarly work.
Dr. Giles was a leading sinologue at the time and an assistant in the Department of
OrientalPrintedBooksandManuscriptsintheBritishMuseum. Apparentlyhewanted
toproduceadeﬁnitiveedition,superiortoanythingelsethatexistedandperhapssome-
thingthatwouldbecomeastandardtranslation. Itwasthebesttranslationavailablefor
50 years. But apparently there was not much interest in Sun Tzu in English- speaking
countries since it took the start of the Second World War to renew interest in his work.
Several people published unsatisfactory English translations of Sun Tzu. In 1944, Dr.
Giles’ translation was edited and published in the United States in a series of military
science books. But it wasn’t until 1963 that a good English translation (by Samuel B.
Grifﬁth and still in print) was published that was an equal to Giles’ translation. While
this translation is more lucid than Dr. Giles’ translation, it lacks his copious notes that
make his so interesting.
CONTENTS 4
Dr. Giles produced a work primarily intended for scholars of the Chinese civiliza-
tionandlanguage. ItcontainstheChinesetextofSunTzu,theEnglishtranslation,and
voluminousnotesalongwithnumerousfootnotes. Unfortunately,someofhisnotesand
footnotes contain Chinese characters; some are completely Chinese. Thus, a conver-
sion to a Latin alphabet etext was difﬁcult. I did the conversion in complete ignorance
of Chinese (except for what I learned while doing the conversion). Thus, I faced the
difﬁculttaskofparaphrasingitwhileretainingasmuchoftheimportanttextasIcould.
Everyparaphraserepresentsaloss;thusIdidwhatIcouldtoretainasmuchofthetext
aspossible. Becausethe1910textcontainsaChineseconcordance,Iwasabletotrans-
literate proper names, books, and the like at the risk of making the text more obscure.
However,thetext,onthewhole,isquitesatisfactoryforthecasualreader,atransform-
ation made possible by conversion to an etext. However, I come away from this task
with the feeling of loss because I know that someone with a background in Chinese
can do a better job than I did; any such attempt would be welcomed.
Bob Sutton
al876@cleveland.freenet.edu
bobs@gnu.ai.mit.edu
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Sun Wu and his Book
Ssu-ma Ch‘ien gives the following biography of Sun Tzu:1
Sun Tzu Wu was a native of the Ch‘i State. His ART OF WAR brought
him to the notice of Ho Lu,2King of Wu.
Ho Lu said to him: "I have carefully perused your 13 chapters. May I
submit your theory of managing soldiers to a slight test?"
Sun Tzu replied: "You may."
Ho Lu asked: "May the test be applied to women?"
The answer was again in the afﬁrmative, so arrangements were made to
bring 180 ladies out of the Palace. Sun Tzu divided them into two com-
panies, and placed one of the King’s favorite concubines at the head of
each. He then bade them all take spears in their hands, and addressed
them thus: "I presume you know the difference between front and back,
right hand and left hand?"
The girls replied: Yes.
SunTzuwenton: "WhenIsay"Eyesfront,"youmustlookstraightahead.
WhenIsay"Leftturn,"youmustfacetowardsyourlefthand. WhenIsay
"Right turn," you must face towards your right hand. When I say "About
turn," you must face right round towards your back."
Again the girls assented. The words of command having been thus ex-
plained, he set up the halberds and battle-axes in order to begin the drill.
Then, to the sound of drums, he gave the order "Right turn." But the girls
onlyburstoutlaughing. SunTzusaid: "Ifwordsofcommandarenotclear
anddistinct,ifordersarenotthoroughlyunderstood,thenthegeneralisto
blame."
1SHI CHI, ch. 65.
2He reigned from 514 to 496 B.C.
5
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 6
So he started drilling them again, and this time gave the order "Left turn,"
whereupon the girls once more burst into ﬁts of laughter. Sun Tzu: "If
words of command are not clear and distinct, if orders are not thoroughly
understood, the general is to blame. But if his orders ARE clear, and the
soldiers nevertheless disobey, then it is the fault of their ofﬁcers."
So saying, he ordered the leaders of the two companies to be beheaded.
Now the king of Wu was watching the scene from the top of a raised
pavilion; and when he saw that his favorite concubines were about to be
executed, he was greatly alarmed and hurriedly sent down the following
message: "We are now quite satisﬁed as to our general’s ability to handle
troops. If We are bereft of these two concubines, our meat and drink will
lose their savor. It is our wish that they shall not be beheaded."
Sun Tzu replied: "Having once received His Majesty’s commission to
be the general of his forces, there are certain commands of His Majesty
which, acting in that capacity, I am unable to accept."
Accordingly, he had the two leaders beheaded, and straightway installed
the pair next in order as leaders in their place. When this had been done,
the drum was sounded for the drill once more; and the girls went through
all the evolutions, turning to the right or to the left, marching ahead or
wheeling back, kneeling or standing, with perfect accuracy and precision,
notventuringtoutterasound. ThenSunTzusentamessengertotheKing
saying: "Your soldiers, Sire, are now properly drilled and disciplined, and
ready for your majesty’s inspection. They can be put to any use that their
sovereign may desire; bid them go through ﬁre and water, and they will
not disobey."
But the King replied: "Let our general cease drilling and return to camp.
As for us, We have no wish to come down and inspect the troops."
Thereupon Sun Tzu said: "The King is only fond of words, and cannot
translate them into deeds."
After that, Ho Lu saw that Sun Tzu was one who knew how to handle an
army,andﬁnallyappointedhimgeneral. Inthewest,hedefeatedtheCh‘u
State and forced his way into Ying, the capital; to the north he put fear
into the States of Ch‘i and Chin, and spread his fame abroad amongst the
feudal princes. And Sun Tzu shared in the might of the King.
About Sun Tzu himself this is all that Ssu-ma Ch‘ien has to tell us in this chapter. But
heproceedstogiveabiographyofhisdescendant,SunPin,bornaboutahundredyears
after his famous ancestor’s death, and also the outstanding military genius of his time.
The historian speaks of him too as Sun Tzu, and in his preface we read: "Sun Tzu
had his feet cut off and yet continued to discuss the art of war."3It seems likely, then,
that "Pin" was a nickname bestowed on him after his mutilation, unless the story was
invented in order to account for the name. The crowning incident of his career, the
3SHI CHI, ch. 130.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 7
crushing defeat of his treacherous rival P‘ang Chuan, will be found brieﬂy related in
Chapter V. ss. 19, note.
ToreturntotheelderSunTzu. HeismentionedintwootherpassagesoftheSHIH
CHI:
In the third year of his reign [512 B.C.] Ho Lu, king of Wu, took the
ﬁeld with Tzu-hsu [i.e. Wu Yuan] and Po P‘ei, and attacked Ch‘u. He
capturedthetownofShuandslewthetwoprince’ssonswhohadformerly
been generals of Wu. He was then meditating a descent on Ying [the
capital]; but the general Sun Wu said: "The army is exhausted. It is not
yet possible. We must wait".... [After further successful ﬁghting,] "in the
ninth year [506 B.C.], King Ho Lu addressed Wu Tzu-hsu and Sun Wu,
saying: "Formerly,youdeclaredthatitwasnotyetpossibleforustoenter
Ying. Is the time ripe now?" The two men replied: "Ch‘u’s general Tzu-
ch‘ang,4isgraspingandcovetous,andtheprincesofT‘angandTs‘aiboth
have a grudge against him. If Your Majesty has resolved to make a grand
attack, you must win over T‘ang and Ts‘ai, and then you may succeed."
HoLufollowedthisadvice,[beatCh‘uinﬁvepitchedbattlesandmarched
into Ying.]5
This is the latest date at which anything is recorded of Sun Wu. He does not appear to
have survived his patron, who diedfrom the effects of a wound in 496.
In another chapter there occursthis passage:6
From this time onward, a number of famous soldiers arose, one after the
other: Kao-fan,7who was employed by the Chin State; Wang-tzu,8in the
service of Ch‘i; and Sun Wu, in the service of Wu. These men developed
and threw light upon the principles of war.
It is obvious enough that Ssu-ma Ch‘ien at least had no doubt about the reality of Sun
Wu as an historical personage; and with one exception, to be noticed presently, he is
by far the most important authority on the period in question. It will not be necessary,
therefore, to say much of such a work as the WU YUEH CH‘UN CH‘IU, which is
supposed to have been written by Chao Yeh of the 1st century A.D. The attribution is
somewhat doubtful; but even if it were otherwise, his account would be of little value,
based as it is on the SHIH CHI and expanded with romantic details. The story of Sun
Tzu will be found, for what it is worth, in chapter 2. The only new points in it worth
noting are: (1) Sun Tzu was ﬁrst recommended to Ho Lu by Wu Tzu-hsu. (2) He is
calledanativeofWu. (3)Hehadpreviouslylivedaretiredlife,andhiscontemporaries
were unaware of his ability.
ThefollowingpassageoccursintheHuai-nanTzu: "Whensovereignandministers
show perversity of mind, it is impossible even for a Sun Tzu to encounter the foe."
4The appellation of Nang Wa.
5SHI CHI, ch. 31.
6SHI CHI, ch. 25.
7The appellation of Hu Yen, mentioned in ch. 39 under the year 637.
8Wang-tzu Ch‘eng-fu, ch. 32, year 607.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 8
Assuming that this work is genuine (and hitherto no doubt has been cast upon it), we
have here the earliest direct reference for Sun Tzu, for Huai-nan Tzu died in 122 B.C.,
many years before the SHIH CHI was given to the world.
Liu Hsiang (80-9 B.C.) says: "The reason why Sun Tzu at the head of 30,000 men
beat Ch‘u with 200,000 is that the latter were undisciplined."
Teng Ming-shih informs us that the surname "Sun" was bestowed on Sun Wu’s
grandfather by Duke Ching of Ch‘i [547-490 B.C.]. Sun Wu’s father Sun P‘ing, rose
tobeaMinisterofStateinCh‘i,andSunWuhimself,whosestylewasCh‘ang-ch‘ing,
ﬂed to Wu on account of the rebellion which was being fomented by the kindred of
T‘ienPao. Hehadthreesons,ofwhomthesecond,namedMing,wasthefatherofSun
Pin. According to this account then, Pin was the grandson of Wu, which, considering
thatSunPin’svictoryoverWeiwasgainedin341B.C.,maybedismissedaschronolo-
gical impossible. Whence these data were obtained by Teng Ming-shih I do not know,
but of course no reliance whatever can be placed in them.
An interesting document which has survived from the close of the Han period is
theshortprefacewrittenbytheGreatTs‘aoTs‘ao,orWeiWuTi,forhiseditionofSun
Tzu. I shall give it in full:
I have heard that the ancients used bows and arrows to their advantage.9
The SHU CHU mentions "the army" among the "eight objects of gov-
ernment." The I CHING says: "’army’ indicates ﬁrmness and justice; the
experiencedleaderwillhavegoodfortune."TheSHIHCHINGsays: "The
Kingrosemajesticinhiswrath,andhemarshaledhistroops."TheYellow
Emperor, T‘ang the Completer and Wu Wang all used spears and battle-
axes in order to succor their generation. The SSU-MA FA says: "If one
man slay another of set purpose, he himself may rightfully be slain." He
whoreliessolelyonwarlikemeasuresshallbeexterminated;hewhorelies
solely on peaceful measures shall perish. Instances of this are Fu Ch‘ai10
on the one hand and Yen Wang on the other.11In military matters, the
Sage’s rule is normally to keep the peace, and to move his forces only
whenoccasionrequires. Hewillnotusearmedforceunlessdriventoitby
necessity.
Many books have I read on the subject of war and ﬁghting; but the work
composed by Sun Wu is the profoundest of them all. [Sun Tzu was a
native of the Ch‘i state, his personal name was Wu. He wrote the ART
OFWARin13chaptersforHoLu,KingofWu. Itsprinciplesweretested
on women, and he was subsequently made a general. He led an army
westwards, crushed the Ch‘u state and entered Ying the capital. In the
north, he kept Ch‘i and Chin in awe. A hundred years and more after his
9"They attached strings to wood to make bows, and sharpened wood to make arrows. The use of bows
and arrows is to keep the Empire in awe."
10The son and successor of Ho Lu. He was ﬁnally defeated and overthrown by Kou chien, King of Yueh,
in 473 B.C. See post.
11KingYenofHsu,afabulousbeing,ofwhomSunHsing-yensaysinhispreface: "Hishumanitybrought
him to destruction."
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 9
time, Sun Pin lived. He was a descendant of Wu.]12In his treatment of
deliberationandplanning,theimportanceofrapidityintakingtheﬁeld,13
clearness of conception, and depth of design, Sun Tzu stands beyond the
reach of carping criticism. My contemporaries, however, have failed to
grasp the full meaning of his instructions, and while putting into practice
the smaller details in which his work abounds, they have overlooked its
essential purport. That is the motive which has led me to outline a rough
explanation of the whole.
One thing to be noticed in the above is the explicit statement that the 13 chapters were
speciallycomposedforKingHoLu. ThisissupportedbytheinternalevidenceofI.ss.
15, in which it seems clear that some ruler is addressed.
In the bibliographic section of the HAN SHU, there is an entry which has given
risetomuchdiscussion: "TheworksofSunTzuofWuin82P‘IEN(orchapters),with
diagramsin9CHUAN."Itisevidentthatthiscannotbemerelythe13chaptersknown
to Ssu-ma Ch‘ien, or those we possess today. Chang Shou-chieh refers to an edition
of Sun Tzu’s ART OF WAR of which the "13 chapters" formed the ﬁrst CHUAN,
addingthatthereweretwootherCHUANbesides. Thishasbroughtforthatheory,that
the bulk of these 82 chapters consisted of other writings of Sun Tzu – we should call
themapocryphal–similartotheWENTA,ofwhichaspecimendealingwiththeNine
Situations14is preserved in the T‘UNG TIEN, and another in Ho Shin’s commentary.
It is suggested that before his interview with Ho Lu, Sun Tzu had only written the
13 chapters, but afterwards composed a sort of exegesis in the form of question and
answer between himself and the King. Pi I-hsun, the author of the SUN TZU HSU
LU,backsthisupwithaquotationfromtheWUYUEHCH‘UNCH‘IU:"TheKingof
Wu summoned Sun Tzu, and asked him questions about the art of war. Each time he
set forth a chapter of his work, the King could not ﬁnd words enough to praise him."
As he points out, if the whole work was expounded on the same scale as in the above-
mentioned fragments, the total number of chapters could not fail to be considerable.
Then the numerous other treatises attributed to Sun Tzu might be included. The fact
that the HAN CHIH mentions no work of Sun Tzu except the 82 P‘IEN, whereas the
SuiandT‘angbibliographiesgivethetitlesofothersinadditiontothe"13chapters,"is
goodproof,Pi I-hsun thinks,thatallofthesewerecontainedin the82P‘IEN.Without
pinningourfaithtotheaccuracyofdetailssuppliedbytheWUYUEHCH‘UNCH‘IU,
or admitting the genuineness of any of the treatises cited by Pi I-hsun, we may see in
this theory a probable solution of the mystery. Between Ssu-ma Ch‘ien and Pan Ku
there was plenty of time for a luxuriant crop of forgeries to have grown up under the
magic name of Sun Tzu, and the 82 P‘IEN may very well represent a collected edition
of these lumped together with the original work. It is also possible, though less likely,
thatsomeofthemexistedinthetimeoftheearlierhistorianandwerepurposelyignored
by him.15
12The passage I have put in brackets is omitted in the T‘U SHU, and may be an interpolation. It was
known, however to Chang Shou-chieh of the T‘ang dynasty, and appears in the T‘AI P‘ING YU LAN.
13Ts‘ao Kung seems to be thinking of the ﬁrst part of chap. II, perhaps especially of ss. 8.
14See chap. XI.
15Ontheotherhand,itisnoteworthythatWUTZU,whichisnotin6chapters,has48assignedtoitinthe
HAN CHIH. Likewise, the CHUNG YUNG is credited with 49 chapters, though now only in one only. In
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 10
Tu Mu’s conjecture seems to be based on a passage which states: "Wei Wu Ti
strung together Sun Wu’s Art of War," which in turn may have resulted from a misun-
derstanding of the ﬁnal words of Ts‘ao King’s preface. This, as Sun Hsing-yen points
out,isonlyamodestwayofsayingthathemadeanexplanatoryparaphrase,orinother
words, wrote a commentary on it. On the whole, this theory has met with very little
acceptance. Thus,theSSUK‘UCH‘UANSHUsays: "Thementionofthe13chapters
in the SHIH CHI shows that they were in existence before the HAN CHIH, and that
latter accretions are not to be considered part of the original work. Tu Mu’s assertion
can certainly not be taken as proof."
There is every reason to suppose, then, that the 13 chapters existed in the time of
Ssu-ma Ch‘ien practically as we have them now. That the work was then well known
hetellsusinsomanywords. "SunTzu’s13ChaptersandWuCh‘i’sArtofWararethe
two books that people commonly refer to on the subject of military matters. Both of
themarewidelydistributed,soIwillnotdiscussthemhere."Butaswegofurtherback,
seriousdifﬁcultiesbegintoarise. ThesalientfactwhichhastobefacedisthattheTSO
CHUAN,thegreatestcontemporaryrecord,makesnomentionwhatsoeverofSunWu,
either as a general or as a writer. It is natural, in view of this awkward circumstance,
that many scholars should not only cast doubt on the story of Sun Wu as given in the
SHIH CHI, but even show themselves frankly skeptical as to the existence of the man
at all. The most powerful presentment of this side of the case is to be found in the
following disposition by Yeh Shui-hsin:16
ItisstatedinSsu-maCh‘ien’shistorythatSunWuwasanativeoftheCh‘i
State, and employed by Wu; and that in the reign of Ho Lu he crushed
Ch‘u,enteredYing,andwasagreatgeneral. ButinTso’sCommentaryno
Sun Wu appears at all. It is true that Tso’s Commentary need not contain
absolutelyeverythingthatotherhistoriescontain. ButTsohasnotomitted
tomentionvulgarplebeiansandhirelingrufﬁanssuchasYingK‘ao-shu,17
Ts‘ao Kuei,18, Chu Chih-wu and Chuan She-chu19. In the case of Sun
Wu,whosefameandachievementsweresobrilliant,theomissionismuch
more glaring. Again, details are given, in their due order, about his con-
temporaries Wu Yuan and the Minister P‘ei.20Is it credible that Sun Wu
alone should have been passedover?
In point of literary style, Sun Tzu’s work belongs to the same school as
KUAN TZU,21LIU T‘AO,22and the YUEH YU23and may have been the
production of some private scholar living towards the end of the "Spring
the case of very short works, one is tempted to think that P‘IEN might simply mean "leaves."
16Yeh Shih of the Sung dynasty [1151-1223].
17He hardly deserves to be bracketed with assassins.
18See Chapter 7, ss. 27 and Chapter 11, ss. 28.
19See Chapter 11, ss. 28. Chuan Chu is the abbreviated form of his name.
20I.e. Po P‘ei. See ante.
21The nucleus of this work is probably genuine, though large additions have been made by later hands.
Kuan chung died in 645 B.C.
22See infra, beginning of INTRODUCTION.
23I do not know what this work, unless it be the last chapter of another work. Why that chapter should be
singled out, however, is not clear.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 11
andAutumn"orthebeginningofthe"WarringStates"period.24Thestory
that his precepts were actually applied by the Wu State, is merely the out-
come of big talk on the part ofhis followers.
FromtheﬂourishingperiodoftheChoudynasty25downtothetimeofthe
"Spring and Autumn," all military commanders were statesmen as well,
andthe class ofprofessionalgenerals, forconductingexternalcampaigns,
did not then exist. It was not until the period of the "Six States"26that
this custom changed. Now although Wu was an uncivilized State, it is
conceivablethatTsoshouldhaveleftunrecordedthefactthatSunWuwas
a great general and yet held no civil ofﬁce? What we are told, therefore,
about Jang-chu27and Sun Wu, is not authentic matter, but the reckless
fabrication of theorizing pundits. The story of Ho Lu’s experiment on the
women, in particular, is utterly preposterous and incredible.
YehShui-hsinrepresentsSsu-maCh‘ienashavingsaidthatSunWucrushedCh‘uand
entered Ying. This is not quite correct. No doubt the impression left on the reader’s
mindisthatheatleastsharedintheseexploits. Thefactmayormaynotbesigniﬁcant;
but it is nowhere explicitly stated in the SHIH CHI either that Sun Tzu was general
on the occasion of the taking of Ying, or that he even went there at all. Moreover, as
we know that Wu Yuan and Po P‘ei both took part in the expedition, and also that its
successwaslargelyduetothedashandenterpriseofFuKai,HoLu’syoungerbrother,
it is not easy to see how yet another general could have played a very prominent part
in the same campaign.
Ch‘en Chen-sun of the Sung dynasty has the note:
Military writers look upon Sun Wu as the father of their art. But the fact
that he does not appear in the TSO CHUAN, although he is said to have
served under Ho Lu King of Wu, makes it uncertain what period he really
belonged to.
He also says:
The works of Sun Wu and Wu Ch‘i may be of genuine antiquity.
It is noticeable that both Yeh Shui-hsin and Ch‘en Chen-sun, while rejecting the per-
sonality of Sun Wu as he ﬁgures in Ssu-ma Ch‘ien’s history, are inclined to accept the
date traditionally assigned to the work which passes under his name. The author of
the HSU LU fails to appreciate this distinction, and consequently his bitter attack on
Ch‘en Chen-sun really misses its mark. He makes one of two points, however, which
certainly tell in favor of the high antiquity of our "13 chapters." "Sun Tzu," he says,
24About 480 B.C.
25That is, I suppose, the age of Wu Wang and Chou Kung.
26In the 3rd century B.C.
27Ssu-ma Jang-chu, whose family name was T‘ien, lived in the latter half of the 6th century B.C., and
is also believed to have written a work on war. See SHIH CHI, ch. 64, and infra at the beginning of the
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 12
"must have lived in the age of Ching Wang [519-476], because he is frequently pla-
giarized in subsequent works of the Chou, Ch‘in and Han dynasties." The two most
shameless offenders in this respect are Wu Ch‘i and Huai-nan Tzu, both of them im-
portant historical personages in their day. The former lived only a century after the
allegeddateofSunTzu,andhisdeathisknowntohavetakenplacein381B.C.Itwas
to him, according to Liu Hsiang, that Tseng Shen delivered the TSO CHUAN, which
had been entrusted to him by its author.28Now the fact that quotations from the ART
OF WAR, acknowledged or otherwise, are to be found in so many authors of differ-
ent epochs, establishes a very strong anterior to them all, – in other words, that Sun
Tzu’s treatise was already in existence towards the end of the 5th century B.C. Further
proof of Sun Tzu’s antiquity is furnished by the archaic or wholly obsolete meanings
attaching to a number of the words he uses. A list of these, which might perhaps be
extended,isgivenintheHSULU;andthoughsomeoftheinterpretationsaredoubtful,
the main argument is hardly affected thereby. Again, it must not be forgotten that Yeh
Shui-hsin,ascholarandcriticoftheﬁrstrank,deliberatelypronouncesthestyleofthe
13 chapters to belong to the early part of the ﬁfth century. Seeing that he is actually
engagedinanattempttodisprovetheexistenceofSunWuhimself,wemaybesurethat
he would not have hesitated to assign the work to a later date had he not honestly be-
lievedthecontrary. Anditispreciselyonsuchapointthatthejudgmentofaneducated
Chinaman will carry most weight. Other internal evidence is not far to seek. Thus in
XIII.ss. 1,thereisanunmistakableallusiontotheancientsystemofland-tenurewhich
had already passed away by the time of Mencius, who was anxious to see it revived in
a modiﬁed form.29The only warfare Sun Tzu knows is that carried on between the
variousfeudalprinces, inwhicharmoredchariots playalargepart. Theiruse seemsto
have entirely died out before the end of the Chou dynasty. He speaks as a man of Wu,
a state which ceased to exist as early as 473 B.C. On this I shall touch presently.
But once refer the work to the 5th century or earlier, and the chances of its being
other than a bona ﬁde production are sensibly diminished. The great age of forgeries
did not come until long after. That it should have been forged in the period immedi-
ately following 473 is particularly unlikely, for no one, as a rule, hastens to identify
himself with a lost cause. As for Yeh Shui-hsin’s theory, that the author was a literary
recluse, that seems to me quite untenable. If one thing is more apparent than another
after reading the maxims of Sun Tzu, it is that their essence has been distilled from
a large store of personal observation and experience. They reﬂect the mind not only
of a born strategist, gifted with a rare faculty of generalization, but also of a practical
soldier closely acquainted with the military conditions of his time. To say nothing of
thefactthatthesesayingshavebeenacceptedandendorsedbyallthegreatestcaptains
of Chinese history, they offer a combination of freshness and sincerity, acuteness and
common sense, which quite excludes the idea that they were artiﬁcially concocted in
the study. If we admit, then, that the 13 chapters were the genuine production of a
militarymanlivingtowardstheendofthe"CH‘UNCH‘IU"period,arewenotbound,
in spite of the silence of the TSO CHUAN, to accept Ssu-ma Ch‘ien’s account in its
entirety? Inviewofhishighreputeasasoberhistorian,mustwenothesitatetoassume
28See Legge’s Classics, vol. V, Prolegomena p. 27. Legge thinks that the TSO CHUAN must have been
written in the 5th century, but not before 424 B.C.
29See MENCIUS III. 1. iii. 13-20.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 13
that the records he drew upon for Sun Wu’s biography were false and untrustworthy?
The answer, I fear, must be in the negative. There is still one grave, if not fatal, objec-
tiontothechronologyinvolvedinthestoryastoldintheSHIHCHI,which,sofarasI
amaware,nobodyhasyetpointedout. TherearetwopassagesinSunTzuinwhichhe
alludes to contemporary affairs. The ﬁrst in in VI. ss. 21:
Though according to my estimate the soldiers of Yueh exceed our own in
number, that shall advantage them nothing in the matter of victory. I say
then that victory can be achieved.
The other is in XI. ss. 30:
AskedifanarmycanbemadetoimitatetheSHUAI-JAN,Ishouldanswer,
Yes. For the men of Wu and the men of Yueh are enemies; yet if they are
crossingariverinthesameboatandarecaughtbyastorm,theywillcome
to each other’s assistance just as the left hand helps the right.
These two paragraphs are extremely valuable as evidence of the date of composition.
They assign the work to the period of the struggle between Wu and Yueh. So much
has been observed by Pi I-hsun. But what has hitherto escaped notice is that they also
seriously impair the credibility of Ssu-ma Ch‘ien’s narrative. As we have seen above,
the ﬁrst positive date given in connection with Sun Wu is 512 B.C. He is then spoken
ofasageneral,actingasconﬁdentialadvisertoHoLu,sothathisallegedintroduction
tothatmonarchhadalreadytakenplace,andofcoursethe13chaptersmusthavebeen
written earlier still. But at that time, and for several years after, down to the capture
of Ying in 506, Ch‘u and not Yueh, was the great hereditary enemy of Wu. The two
states,Ch‘uandWu,hadbeenconstantlyatwarforoverhalfacentury,30whereasthe
ﬁrst war between Wu and Yueh was waged only in 510,31and even then was no more
than a short interlude sandwiched in the midst of the ﬁerce struggle with Ch‘u. Now
Ch‘u is not mentioned in the 13 chapters at all. The natural inference is that they were
writtenatatimewhenYuehhadbecometheprimeantagonistofWu,thatis,afterCh‘u
had suffered the great humiliation of 506. At this point, a table of dates may be found
useful.
30WhenWuﬁrstappearsintheCH‘UNCH‘IUin584,itisalreadyatvariancewithitspowerfulneighbor.
The CH‘UN CH‘IU ﬁrst mentions Yueh in 537, the TSO CHUAN in 601.
31This is explicitly stated in the TSO CHUAN, XXXII, 2.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 14
B.C.
514 Accession of Ho Lu.
512 Ho Lu attacks Ch‘u, but is dissuaded from entering Ying, | the capital. SHI CHI mentions Sun Wu as general.
511 Another attack on Ch‘u.
510 Wu makes a successful attack on Yueh. This is the ﬁrst war between the two states.
508 or 509 Ch‘u invades Wu, but is signally defeated at Yu-chang.
506 Ho Lu attacks Ch‘u with the aid of T‘ang and Ts‘ai. Decisive battle of Po-chu, and capture of Ying. Last mention of Sun Wu in SHIH CHI.
505 Yueh makes a raid on Wu inthe absence of its army. Wu is beaten by Ch‘in and evacuates Ying.
504 Ho Lu sends Fu Ch‘ai to attackCh‘u.
497 Kou Chien becomes King ofYueh.
496 Wu attacks Yueh, but is defeated by Kou Chien at Tsui-li. Ho Lu is killed.
494 Fu Ch‘ai defeats Kou Chienin the great battle of Fuchaio, and enters the capital ofYueh.
485 or 484 Kou Chien renders homage toWu. Death of Wu Tzu-hsu.
482 Kou Chien invades Wu in the absence of Fu Ch‘ai.
478 to 476 Further attacks by Yueh onWu.
475 Kou Chien lays siege to the capital of Wu.
473 Final defeat and extinction ofWu.
ThesentencequotedabovefromVI.ss. 21hardlystrikesmeasonethatcouldhave
beenwritteninthefullﬂushofvictory. Itseemsrathertoimplythat,forthemomentat
least,thetidehadturnedagainstWu,andthatshewasgettingtheworstofthestruggle.
Hence we may conclude that our treatise was not in existence in 505, before which
date Yueh does not appear to have scored any notable success against Wu. Ho Lu died
in 496, so that if the book was written for him, it must have been during the period
505-496, when there was a lull in the hostilities, Wu having presumably exhausted
by its supreme effort against Ch‘u. On the other hand, if we choose to disregard the
tradition connecting Sun Wu’s name with Ho Lu, it might equally well have seen the
light between 496 and 494, or possibly in the period 482-473, when Yueh was once
again becoming a very serious menace.32We may feel fairly certain that the author,
whoever he may have been, was not a man of any great eminence in his own day.
On this point the negative testimony of the TSO CHUAN far outweighs any shred of
authority still attaching to the SHIH CHI, if once its other facts are discredited. Sun
Hsing-yen, however, makes a feeble attempt to explain the omission of his name from
the great commentary. It was Wu Tzu-hsu, he says, who got all the credit of Sun Wu’s
exploits,becausethelatter(beinganalien)wasnotrewardedwithanofﬁceintheState.
How then did the Sun Tzu legend originate? It may be that the growing celebrity
of the book imparted by degrees a kind of factitious renown to its author. It was felt
to be only right and proper that one so well versed in the science of war should have
solidachievementstohiscreditaswell. NowthecaptureofYingwasundoubtedlythe
greatestfeatofarmsinHoLu’sreign;itmadeadeepandlastingimpressiononallthe
surrounding states, and raised Wu to the short-lived zenith of her power. Hence, what
morenatural,astimewenton,thanthattheacknowledgedmasterofstrategy,SunWu,
shouldbepopularlyidentiﬁedwiththatcampaign,atﬁrstperhapsonlyinthesensethat
his brain conceived and planned it; afterwards, that it was actually carried out by him
32There is this to be said for the later period, that the feud would tend to grow more bitter after each
encounter, and thus more fully justify the language used in XI. ss. 30.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 15
in conjunction with Wu Yuan,33Po P‘ei and Fu Kai?
ItisobviousthatanyattempttoreconstructeventheoutlineofSunTzu’slifemust
bebasedalmostwhollyonconjecture. Withthisnecessaryproviso,Ishouldsaythathe
probably entered the service of Wu about the time of Ho Lu’s accession, and gathered
experience,thoughonlyinthecapacityofasubordinateofﬁcer,duringtheintensemil-
itary activity which marked the ﬁrst half of the prince’s reign.34If he rose to be a gen-
eral at all, he certainly was never on an equal footing with the three above mentioned.
HewasdoubtlesspresentattheinvestmentandoccupationofYing,andwitnessedWu’s
sudden collapse in the following year. Yueh’s attack at this critical juncture, when her
rival was embarrassed on every side, seems to have convinced him that this upstart
kingdom was the great enemy against whom every effort would henceforth have to be
directed. Sun Wu was thus a well-seasoned warrior when he sat down to write his
famous book, which according to my reckoning must have appeared towards the end,
ratherthanthebeginningofHoLu’sreign. Thestoryofthewomenmaypossiblyhave
grown out of some real incident occurring about the same time. As we hear no more
of Sun Wu after this from any source, he is hardly likely to have survived his patron
or to have taken part in the death-struggle with Yueh, which began with the disaster at
Tsuili.
If these inferences are approximately correct, there is a certain irony in the fate
whichdecreedthatChina’smostillustriousmanofpeaceshouldbecontemporarywith
her greatest writer on war.
1.2 The Text of Sun Tzu
I have found it difﬁcult to glean much about the history of Sun Tzu’s text. The quo-
tations that occur in early authors go to show that the "13 chapters" of which Ssu-ma
Ch‘ien speaks were essentially the same as those now extant. We have his word for it
that they were widely circulated in his day, and can only regret that he refrained from
discussing them on that account. Sun Hsing-yen says in his preface:
During the Ch‘in and Han dynasties Sun Tzu’s ART OF WAR was in
general use amongst military commanders, but they seem to have treated
itasaworkofmysteriousimport,andwereunwillingtoexpounditforthe
beneﬁt of posterity. Thus it came about that Wei Wu was the ﬁrst to write
a commentary on it.
As we have already seen, there is no reasonable ground to suppose that Ts‘ao Kung
tampered with the text. But the text itself is often so obscure, and the number of edi-
tions which appeared from that time onward so great, especially during the T‘ang and
Sung dynasties, that it would be surprising if numerous corruptions had not managed
33WithWuYuanhimselfthecaseisjustthereverse: –aspurioustreatiseonwarhasbeenfatheredonhim
simply because he was a great general. Here we have an obvious inducement to forgery. Sun Wu, on the
other hand, cannot have been widely known to fame in the 5th century.
34From TSO CHUAN: "From the date of King Chao’s accession [515] there was no year in which Ch‘u
was not attacked by Wu."
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 16
to creep in. Towards the middle of the Sung period, by which time all the chief com-
mentaries on Sun Tzu were in existence, a certain Chi T‘ien-pao published a work in
15 CHUAN entitled "Sun Tzu with the collected commentaries of ten writers." There
was another text, with variant readings put forward by Chu Fu of Ta-hsing, which also
hadsupportersamongthescholarsofthatperiod;butintheMingeditions,SunHsing-
yen tells us, these readings were for some reason or other no longer put into circula-
tion. Thus, until the end of the 18th century, the text in sole possession of the ﬁeld
was one derived from Chi T‘ien-pao’s edition, although no actual copy of that import-
ant work was known to have survived. That, therefore, is the text of Sun Tzu which
appears in the War section of the great Imperial encyclopedia printed in 1726, the KU
CHIN T‘U SHU CHI CH‘ENG. Another copy at my disposal of what is practically
the same text, with slight variations, is that contained in the "Eleven philosophers of
the Chou and Ch‘in dynasties" [1758]. And the Chinese printed in Capt. Calthrop’s
ﬁrsteditionisevidentlyasimilarversionwhichhasﬁlteredthroughJapanesechannels.
So things remained until Sun Hsing-yen [1752-1818], a distinguished antiquarian and
classical scholar, who claimed to be an actual descendant of Sun Wu,35accidentally
discovered a copy of Chi T‘ien-pao’s long-lost work, when on a visit to the library
of the Hua-yin temple.36Appended to it was the I SHUO of Cheng Yu-Hsien, men-
tioned in the T‘UNG CHIH, and also believed to have perished. This is what Sun
Hsing-yendesignatesasthe"originaledition(ortext)"–arathermisleadingname,for
it cannot by any means claim to set before us the text of Sun Tzu in its pristine purity.
Chi T‘ien-pao was a careless compiler, and appears to have been content to reproduce
the somewhat debased version current in his day, without troubling to collate it with
the earliest editions then available. Fortunately, two versions of Sun Tzu, even older
than the newly discovered work, were still extant, one buried in the T‘UNG TIEN, Tu
Yu’sgreattreatiseontheConstitution,theothersimilarlyenshrinedintheT‘AIP‘ING
YU LAN encyclopedia. In both the complete text is to be found, though split up into
fragments,intermixedwithothermatter,andscatteredpiecemealoveranumberofdif-
ferent sections. Considering that the YU LAN takes us back to the year 983, and the
T‘UNG TIEN about 200 years further still, to the middle of the T‘ang dynasty, the
valueoftheseearlytranscriptsofSunTzucanhardlybeoverestimated. Yettheideaof
utilizing them does not seem to have occurred to anyone until Sun Hsing-yen, acting
underGovernmentinstructions,undertookathoroughrecensionofthetext. Thisishis
own account:
BecauseofthenumerousmistakesinthetextofSunTzuwhichhiseditors
had handed down, the Government ordered that the ancient edition [of
Chi T‘ien-pao] should be used, and that the text should be revised and
correctedthroughout. IthappenedthatWuNien-hu,theGovernorPiKua,
and Hsi, a graduate of the second degree, had all devoted themselves to
35Prefaceadﬁn: "MyfamilycomesfromLo-an,andwearereallydescendedfromSunTzu. Iamashamed
tosaythatIonlyreadmyancestor’sworkfromaliterarypointofview,withoutcomprehendingthemilitary
technique. So long have we been enjoying the blessings of peace!"
36Hoa-yin is about 14 miles from T‘ung-kuan on the eastern border of Shensi. The temple in question
is still visited by those about the ascent of the Western Sacred Mountain. It is mentioned in a text as being
"situatedﬁveLIeastofthedistrictcityofHua-yin. ThetemplecontainstheHua-shantabletinscribedbythe
T‘ang Emperor Hsuan Tsung [713-755]."
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 17
this study, probably surpassing me therein. Accordingly, I have had the
whole work cut on blocks as atextbook for military men.
The three individuals here referred to had evidently been occupied on the text of Sun
Tzu prior to Sun Hsing-yen’s commission, but we are left in doubt as to the work they
reallyaccomplished. Atanyrate,thenewedition,whenultimatelyproduced,appeared
in the names of Sun Hsing-yen and only one co- editor Wu Jen-shi. They took the
"original edition" as their basis, and by careful comparison with older versions, as
wellastheextantcommentariesandothersourcesofinformationsuchastheISHUO,
succeeded in restoring a very large number of doubtful passages, and turned out, on
thewhole,whatmustbeacceptedastheclosesapproximationweareeverlikelytoget
to Sun Tzu’s original work. This is what will hereafter be denominated the "standard
text."
The copy which I have used belongs to a reissue dated 1877. it is in 6 PEN, form-
ing part of a well-printed set of 23 early philosophical works in 83 PEN.37It opens
with a preface by Sun Hsing-yen (largely quoted in this introduction), vindicating the
traditional view of Sun Tzu’s life and performances, and summing up in remarkably
concise fashion the evidence in its favor. This is followed by Ts‘ao Kung’s preface to
his edition, and the biography of Sun Tzu from the SHIH CHI, both translated above.
Then come, ﬁrstly, Cheng Yu-hsien’s I SHUO,38with author’s preface, and next, a
shortmiscellanyofhistoricalandbibliographicalinformationentitledSUNTZUHSU
LU,compiledbyPiI-hsun. Asregardsthebodyofthework,eachseparatesentenceis
followedbyanoteonthetext,ifrequired,andthenbythevariouscommentariesapper-
taining to it, arranged in chronological order. These we shall now proceed to discuss
brieﬂy, one by one.
1.3 The Commentators
Sun Tzu can boast an exceptionally long distinguished roll of commentators, which
would do honor to any classic. Ou-yang Hsiu remarks on this fact, though he wrote
before the tale was complete, and rather ingeniously explains it by saying that the
artiﬁces of war, being inexhaustible, must therefore be susceptible of treatment in a
great variety of ways.
1. TS‘AO TS‘AO or Ts‘ao Kung, afterwards known as Wei Wu Ti [A.D. 155-220].
There is hardly any room for doubt that the earliest commentary on Sun Tzu
actually came from the pen of this extraordinary man, whose biography in the
SAN KUO CHIH reads like a romance. One of the greatest military geniuses
that the world has seen, and Napoleonic in the scale of his operations, he was
especially famed for the marvelous rapidity of his marches, which has found
expression in the line "Talk of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will appear." Ou-
yang Hsiu says of him that he was a great captain who "measured his strength
against Tung Cho, Lu Pu and the two Yuan, father and son, and vanquished
37See my "Catalogue of Chinese Books" (Luzac & Co., 1908), no. 40.
38This is a discussion of 29 difﬁcult passages in Sun Tzu.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 18
them all; whereupon he divided the Empire of Han with Wu and Shu, and made
himself king. It is recorded that whenever a council of war was held by Wei
on the eve of a far-reaching campaign, he had all his calculations ready; those
generals who made use of them did not lose one battle in ten; those who ran
counter to them in any particular saw their armies incontinently beaten and put
to ﬂight." Ts‘ao Kung’s notes on Sun Tzu, models of austere brevity, are so
thoroughlycharacteristicofthesterncommanderknowntohistory,thatitishard
indeed to conceive of them as the work of a mere LITTERATEUR. Sometimes,
indeed, owing to extreme compression, they are scarcely intelligible and stand
no less in need of a commentary than the text itself.39
2. MENG SHIH. The commentary which has come down to us under this name
is comparatively meager, and nothing about the author is known. Even his per-
sonalnamehasnotbeenrecorded. ChiT‘ien-pao’seditionplaceshimafterChia
Lin,and Ch‘ao Kung- wu also assigns him to the T‘ang dynasty,40but this is a
mistake. InSunHsing-yen’spreface,heappearsasMengShihoftheLiangdyn-
asty [502-557]. Others would identify him with Meng K‘ang of the 3rd century.
Heisnamedinoneworkasthelastofthe"FiveCommentators,"theothersbeing
Wei Wu Ti, Tu Mu, Ch‘en Hao and Chia Lin.
3. LICH‘UANofthe8thcenturywasawell-knownwriteronmilitarytactics. One
ofhisworkshasbeeninconstantusedowntothepresentday. TheT‘UNGCHIH
mentions "Lives of famous generals from the Chou to the T‘ang dynasty" as
written by him.41According to Ch‘ao Kung-wu and the T‘IEN-I-KO catalogue,
he followed a variant of the text of Sun Tzu which differs considerably from
those now extant. His notes are mostly short and to the point, and he frequently
illustrates his remarks by anecdotes from Chinese history.
4. TUYU(died812)didnotpublishaseparatecommentaryonSunTzu,hisnotes
beingtakenfromtheT‘UNGTIEN,theencyclopedictreatiseontheConstitution
which was his life- work. They are largely repetitions of Ts‘ao Kung and Meng
Shih, besides which it is believed that he drew on the ancient commentaries of
Wang Ling and others. Owing to the peculiar arrangement of T‘UNG TIEN, he
has to explain each passage on its merits, apart from the context, and sometimes
his own explanation does not agree with that of Ts‘ao Kung, whom he always
quotes ﬁrst. Though not strictly to be reckoned as one of the "Ten Commentat-
ors,"hewasaddedtotheirnumberbyChiT‘ien-pao,beingwronglyplacedafter
his grandson Tu Mu.
5. TU MU (803-852) is perhaps the best known as a poet – a bright star even in
the glorious galaxy of the T‘ang period. We learn from Ch‘ao Kung-wu that
although he had no practical experience of war, he was extremely fond of dis-
cussing the subject, and was moreover well read in the military history of the
39Cf. Catalogue of the library of Fan family at Ningpo: "His commentary is frequently obscure; it fur-
nishes a clue, but does not fully develop the meaning."
40WEN HSIEN T‘UNG K‘AO, ch. 221.
41ItisinterestingtonotethatM.Pelliothasrecentlydiscoveredchapters1,4and5ofthislostworkinthe
"Grottos of the Thousand Buddhas." See B.E.F.E.O., t. VIII, nos. 3-4, p. 525.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 19
CH‘UN CH‘IU and CHAN KUO eras. His notes, therefore, are well worth at-
tention. They are very copious, and replete with historical parallels. The gist of
Sun Tzu’s work is thus summarized by him: "Practice benevolence and justice,
but on the other hand make full use of artiﬁce and measures of expediency." He
furtherdeclaredthatallthemilitarytriumphsanddisastersofthethousandyears
which had elapsed since Sun Tzu’s death would, upon examination, be found to
uphold and corroborate, in every particular, the maxims contained in his book.
Tu Mu’s somewhat spiteful charge against Ts‘ao Kung has already been con-
sidered elsewhere.
6. CH‘EN HAO appears to have been a contemporary of Tu Mu. Ch‘ao Kung-
wu says that he was impelled to write a new commentary on Sun Tzu because
Ts‘ao Kung’s on the one hand was too obscure and subtle, and that of Tu Mu
on the other too long-winded and diffuse. Ou-yang Hsiu, writing in the middle
of the 11th century, calls Ts‘ao Kung, Tu Mu and Ch‘en Hao the three chief
commentatorsonSunTzu,andobservesthatCh‘enHaoiscontinuallyattacking
TuMu’s shortcomings. His commentary,though notlacking inmerit, mustrank
below those of his predecessors.
7. CHIA LIN is known to have lived under the T‘ang dynasty, for his commentary
on Sun Tzu is mentioned in the T‘ang Shu and was afterwards republished by
Chi Hsieh of the same dynasty together with those of Meng Shih and Tu Yu.
It is of somewhat scanty texture, and in point of quality, too, perhaps the least
valuable of the eleven.
8. MEIYAO-CH‘EN(1002-1060),commonlyknownbyhis"style"asMeiSheng-
yu, was, like Tu Mu, a poet of distinction. His commentary was published with
a laudatory preface by the great Ou-yang Hsiu, from which we may cull the fol-
lowing:
Later scholars have misread Sun Tzu, distorting his words and trying to make
them square with their own one-sided views. Thus, though commentators have
not been lacking, only a few have proved equal to the task. My friend Sheng-yu
has not fallen into this mistake. In attempting to provide a critical commentary
for Sun Tzu’s work, he does notlose sight of thefact that these sayings were in-
tendedforstatesengagedininternecinewarfare;thattheauthorisnotconcerned
with the military conditions prevailing under the sovereigns of the three ancient
dynasties,42nor with the nine punitive measures prescribed to the Minister of
War.43Again, Sun Wu loved brevity of diction, but his meaning is always deep.
Whetherthesubjectbemarchinganarmy,orhandlingsoldiers,orestimatingthe
enemy,orcontrollingtheforcesofvictory,itisalwayssystematicallytreated;the
sayings are bound together in strict logical sequence, though this has been ob-
scuredbycommentatorswhohaveprobablyfailedtograsptheirmeaning. Inhis
42The Hsia, the Shang and the Chou. Although the last-named was nominally existent in Sun Tzu’s day,
it retained hardly a vestige of power, and the old military organization had practically gone by the board. I
can suggest no other explanation of the passage.
43See CHOU LI, xxix. 6-10.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 20
owncommentary,MeiSheng-yuhasbrushedasidealltheobstinateprejudicesof
these critics, and has tried to bring out the true meaning of Sun Tzu himself. In
thisway,thecloudsofconfusionhavebeendispersedandthesayingsmadeclear.
I am convinced that the present work deserves to be handed down side by side
with the three great commentaries; and for a great deal that they ﬁnd in the say-
ings,cominggenerationswillhaveconstantreasontothankmyfriendSheng-yu.
Making some allowance for the exuberance of friendship, I am inclined to en-
dorse this favorable judgment, and would certainly place him above Ch‘en Hao
in order of merit.
9. WANG HSI, also of the Sung dynasty, is decidedly original in some of his in-
terpretations, but much less judicious than Mei Yao-ch‘en, and on the whole not
a very trustworthy guide. He is fond of comparing his own commentary with
that of Ts‘ao Kung, but the comparison is not often ﬂattering to him. We learn
from Ch‘ao Kung-wu that Wang Hsi revised the ancient text of Sun Tzu, ﬁlling
up lacunae and correcting mistakes.44
10. HO YEN-HSI of the Sung dynasty. The personal name of this commentator is
given as above by Cheng Ch‘iao in the TUNG CHIH, written about the middle
ofthetwelfthcentury,butheappearssimplyasHoShihintheYUHAI,andMa
Tuan-lin quotes Ch‘ao Kung-wu as saying that his personal name is unknown.
There seems to be no reason to doubt Cheng Ch‘iao’s statement, otherwise I
shouldhavebeeninclinedtohazardaguessandidentifyhimwithoneHoCh‘u-
fei, the author of a short treatise on war, who lived in the latter part of the 11th
century. Ho Shih’s commentary, in the words of the T‘IEN-I-KO catalogue,
"contains helpful additions" here and there, but is chieﬂy remarkable for the
copious extracts taken, in adapted form, from the dynastic histories and other
sources.
11. CHANGYU.Thelistcloseswithacommentatorofnogreatoriginalityperhaps,
but gifted with admirable powers of lucid exposition. His commentator is based
onthatofTs‘aoKung,whosetersesentenceshecontrivestoexpandanddevelop
in masterly fashion. Without Chang Yu, it is safe to say that much of Ts‘ao
Kung’s commentary would have remained cloaked in its pristine obscurity and
therefore valueless. His work is not mentioned in the Sung history, the T‘UNG
K‘AO, or the YU HAI, but it ﬁnds a niche in the T‘UNG CHIH, which also
names him as the author of the "Lives of Famous Generals."45
It is rather remarkable that the last-named four should all have ﬂourished within
so short a space of time. Ch‘ao Kung-wu accounts for it by saying: "During
the early years of the Sung dynasty the Empire enjoyed a long spell of peace,
andmenceasedtopracticetheartofwar. butwhen[Chao]Yuan-hao’srebellion
came[1038-42]andthefrontiergeneralsweredefeatedtimeaftertime,theCourt
made strenuous inquiry for men skilled in war, and military topics became the
44T‘UNG K‘AO, ch. 221.
45This appears to be still extant. See Wylie’s "Notes," p. 91 (new edition).
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 21
vogue amongst all the high ofﬁcials. Hence it is that the commentators of Sun
Tzu in our dynasty belong mainly to that period.46
Besides these eleven commentators, there are several others whose work has not come
down to us. The SUI SHU mentions four, namely Wang Ling (often quoted by Tu Yu
asWangTzu);ChangTzu-shang;ChiaHsuofWei;47andShenYuofWu. TheT‘ANG
SHU adds Sun Hao, and the T‘UNG CHIH Hsiao Chi, while the T‘U SHU mentions
a Ming commentator, Huang Jun-yu. It is possible that some of these may have been
merelycollectorsandeditorsofothercommentaries,likeChiT‘ien-paoandChiHsieh,
mentioned above.
1.4 Appreciations of Sun Tzu
Sun Tzu has exercised a potent fascination over the minds of some of China’s greatest
men. Among the famous generals who are known to have studied his pages with en-
thusiasmmaybementionedHanHsin(d. 196B.C.),48FengI(d. 34A.D.),49LuMeng
(d. 219),50and Yo Fei (1103-1141).51The opinion of Ts‘ao Kung, who disputes with
Han Hsin the highest place in Chinese military annals, has already been recorded.52
Still more remarkable, in one way, is the testimony of purely literary men, such as Su
Hsun (the father of Su Tung-p‘o), who wrote several essays on military topics, all of
which owe their chief inspiration to Sun Tzu. The following short passage by him is
preserved in the YU HAI:53
Sun Wu’s saying, that in war one cannot make certain of conquering,54is
verydifferentindeedfromwhatotherbookstellus.55WuCh‘iwasaman
of the same stamp as Sun Wu: they both wrote books on war, and they
are linked together in popular speech as "Sun and Wu." But Wu Ch‘i’s
remarks on war are less weighty, his rules are rougher and more crudely
stated,andthereisnotthesameunityofplanasinSunTzu’swork,where
the style is terse, but the meaning fully brought out.
Thefollowingisanextractfromthe"ImpartialJudgmentsintheGardenofLiterature"
by Cheng Hou:
46T‘UNG K‘AO, loc. cit.
47A notable person in his day. His biography is given in the SAN KUO CHIH, ch. 10.
48See XI. ss. 58, note.
49HOU HAN SHU, ch. 17 ad init.
50SAN KUO CHIH, ch. 54.
51SUNG SHIH, ch. 365 ad init.
52The few Europeans who have yet had an opportunity of acquainting themselves with Sun Tzu are not
behindhandintheirpraise. Inthisconnection,ImayperhapsbeexcusedforquotingfromaletterfromLord
Roberts,towhomthesheetsofthepresentworkweresubmittedprevioustopublication: "ManyofSunWu’s
maximsareperfectlyapplicabletothepresentday,andno. 11[inChapterVIII]isonethatthepeopleofthis
country would do well to take to heart."
53Ch. 140.
54See IV. ss. 3.
55The allusion may be to Mencius VI. 2. ix. 2.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 22
SunTzu’s13chaptersarenotonlythestapleandbaseofallmilitarymen’s
training,butalsocompelthemostcarefulattentionofscholarsandmenof
letters. Hissayingsareterseyetelegant,simpleyetprofound,perspicuous
and eminently practical. Such works as the LUN YU, the I CHING and
thegreatCommentary,56aswellasthewritingsofMencius,HsunK‘uang
and Yang Chu, all fall below the level of Sun Tzu.
Chu Hsi, commenting on this, fully admits the ﬁrst part of the criticism, although he
dislikes the audacious comparison with the venerated classical works. Language of
this sort, he says, "encourages a ruler’s bent towards unrelenting warfare and reckless
militarism."
1.5 Apologies for War
Accustomed as we are to think of China as the greatest peace-loving nation on earth,
we are in some danger of forgetting that her experience of war in all its phases has
also been such as no modern State can parallel. Her long military annals stretch back
to a point at which they are lost in the mists of time. She had built the Great Wall
and was maintaining a huge standing army along her frontier centuries before the ﬁrst
Roman legionary was seen on the Danube. What with the perpetual collisions of the
ancient feudal States, the grim conﬂicts with Huns, Turks and other invaders after the
centralization of government, the terriﬁc upheavals which accompanied the overthrow
ofsomanydynasties,besidesthecountlessrebellionsandminordisturbancesthathave
ﬂamedupandﬂickeredoutagainonebyone,itishardlytoomuchtosaythattheclash
of arms has never ceased to resound in one portion or another of the Empire.
No less remarkable is the succession of illustrious captains to whom China can
point with pride. As in all countries, the greatest are fond of emerging at the most
fateful crises of her history. Thus, Po Ch‘i stands out conspicuous in the period when
Ch‘in was entering upon her ﬁnal struggle with the remaining independent states. The
stormy years which followed the break-up of the Ch‘in dynasty are illuminated by
the transcendent genius of Han Hsin. When the House of Han in turn is tottering to
its fall, the great and baleful ﬁgure of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao dominates the scene. And in the
establishment of the T‘ang dynasty,one of the mightiest tasks achieved by man, the
superhumanenergyofLiShih-min(afterwardstheEmperorT‘aiTsung)wasseconded
bythebrilliantstrategyofLiChing. Noneofthesegeneralsneedfearcomparisonwith
the greatest names in the military history of Europe.
Inspiteofallthis,thegreatbodyofChinesesentiment,fromLaoTzudownwards,
andespeciallyasreﬂectedinthestandardliteratureofConfucianism,hasbeenconsist-
ently paciﬁc and intensely opposed to militarism in any form. It is such an uncommon
thing to ﬁnd any of the literati defending warfare on principle, that I have thought it
worth while to collect and translate a few passages in which the unorthodox view is
upheld. The following, by Ssu-ma Ch‘ien, shows that for all his ardent admiration of
Confucius, he was yet no advocate of peace at any price:
56The TSO CHUAN.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 23
Military weapons are the means used by the Sage to punish violence and
cruelty,togivepeacetotroubloustimes,toremovedifﬁcultiesanddangers,
and to succor those who are in peril. Every animal with blood in its veins
and horns on its head will ﬁght when it is attacked. How much more so
willman,whocarriesinhisbreastthefacultiesofloveandhatred,joyand
anger! When he is pleased, a feeling of affection springs up within him;
whenangry,hispoisonedstingisbroughtintoplay. Thatisthenaturallaw
which governs his being.... What then shall be said of those scholars of
our time, blind to all great issues, and without any appreciation of relat-
ive values, who can only bark out their stale formulas about "virtue" and
"civilization," condemning the use of military weapons? They will surely
bring our country to impotence and dishonor and the loss of her rightful
heritage; or, at the very least, they will bring about invasion and rebellion,
sacriﬁceofterritoryandgeneralenfeeblement. Yettheyobstinatelyrefuse
to modify the position they have taken up. The truth is that, just as in the
family the teacher must not spare the rod, and punishments cannot be dis-
pensed with in the State, so military chastisement can never be allowed to
fallintoabeyanceintheEmpire. Allonecansayisthatthispowerwillbe
exercised wisely by some, foolishly by others, and that among those who
bear arms some will be loyal and others rebellious.57
The next piece is taken from TuMu’s preface to his commentary on Sun Tzu:
War may be deﬁned as punishment, which is one of the functions of gov-
ernment. It was the profession of Chung Yu and Jan Ch‘iu, both disciples
ofConfucius. Nowadays,theholdingoftrialsandhearingoflitigation,the
imprisonment of offenders and their execution by ﬂogging in the market-
place,arealldonebyofﬁcials. Butthewieldingofhugearmies,thethrow-
ing down of fortiﬁed cities, the hauling of women and children into cap-
tivity, and the beheading of traitors – this is also work which is done by
ofﬁcials. The objects of the rack and of military weapons are essentially
thesame. Thereisnointrinsicdifferencebetweenthepunishmentofﬂog-
ging and cutting off heads in war. For the lesser infractions of law, which
are easily dealt with, only a small amount of force need be employed:
hence the use of military weapons and wholesale decapitation. In both
cases, however, the end in view is to get rid of wicked people, and to give
comfort and relief to the good....
Chi-sun asked Jan Yu, saying: "Have you, Sir, acquired your military
aptitude by study, or is it innate?" Jan Yu replied: "It has been acquired
by study."58"How can that be so," said Chi-sun, "seeing that you are a
disciple of Confucius?" "It is a fact," replied Jan Yu; "I was taught by
Confucius. It is ﬁtting that the great Sage should exercise both civil and
military functions, though to be sure my instruction in the art of ﬁghting
has not yet gone very far."
57SHIH CHI, ch. 25, fol. I.
58Cf. SHIH CHI, ch 47.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 24
Now, who the author was of this rigid distinction between the "civil" and
the "military," and the limitation of each to a separate sphere of action, or
in what year of which dynasty it was ﬁrst introduced, is more than I can
say. But, at any rate, it has come about that the members of the governing
class are quite afraid of enlarging on military topics, or do so only in a
shamefacedmanner. Ifanyareboldenoughtodiscussthesubject,theyare
atoncesetdownaseccentricindividualsofcoarseandbrutalpropensities.
Thisisanextraordinaryinstanceinwhich,throughsheerlackofreasoning,
men unhappily lose sight of fundamental principles.
When the Duke of Chou was minister under Ch‘eng Wang, he regulated
ceremonies and made music, and venerated the arts of scholarship and
learning; yet when the barbarians of the River Huai revolted,59he sallied
forth and chastised them. When Confucius held ofﬁce under the Duke
of Lu, and a meeting was convened at Chia-ku,60he said: "If paciﬁc ne-
gotiations are in progress, warlike preparations should have been made
beforehand." He rebuked and shamed the Marquis of Ch‘i, who cowered
underhimanddarednotproceedtoviolence. Howcanitbesaidthatthese
two great Sages had no knowledge of military matters?
We have seen that the great Chu Hsi held Sun Tzu in high esteem. He also appeals to
the authority of the Classics:
Our Master Confucius, answering Duke Ling of Wei, said: "I have never
studiedmattersconnectedwitharmiesandbattalions."61ReplyingtoK‘ung
Wen-tzu,hesaid: Ihavenotbeeninstructedaboutbuff-coatsandweapons."
ButifweturntothemeetingatChia-ku,weﬁndthatheusedarmedforce
against the men of Lai, so that the marquis of Ch‘i was overawed. Again,
whentheinhabitantsofPirevolted,theorderedhisofﬁcerstoattackthem,
whereupon they were defeated and ﬂed in confusion. He once uttered the
words: "IfIﬁght,Iconquer."62AndJanYualsosaid: "TheSageexercises
both civil and military functions."63Can it be a fact that Confucius never
studied or received instruction in the art of war? We can only say that he
did not specially choose matters connected with armies and ﬁghting to be
the subject of his teaching.
Sun Hsing-yen, the editor of SunTzu, writes in similar strain:
Confucius said: "I am unversed in military matters."64He also said: "If
I ﬁght, I conquer." Confucius ordered ceremonies and regulated music.
Now war constitutes one of the ﬁve classes of State ceremonial,65and
59See SHU CHING, preface ss. 55.
60See SHIH CHI, ch. 47.
61Lun Yu, XV. 1.
62I failed to trace this utterance.
63Supra.
64Supra.
65The other four being worship, mourning, entertainment of guests, and festive rites. See SHU CHING,
ii. 1. III. 8, and CHOU LI, IX. fol. 49.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 25
must not be treated as an independent branch of study. Hence, the words
"Iamunversedin"mustbetakentomeanthattherearethingswhicheven
an inspired Teacher does not know. Those who have to lead an army and
devise stratagems, must learn the art of war. But if one can command
the services of a good general like Sun Tzu, who was employed by Wu
Tzu-hsu, there is no need to learn it oneself. Hence the remark added by
Confucius: "If I ﬁght, I conquer."
The men of the present day, however, willfully interpret these words of
Confucius in their narrowest sense, as though he meant that books on the
artofwarwerenotworthreading. Withblindpersistency,theyadducethe
example of Chao Kua, who pored over his father’s books to no purpose,66
as a proof that all military theory is useless. Again, seeing that books on
war have to do with such things as opportunism in designing plans, and
the conversion of spies, they hold that the art is immoral and unworthy of
a sage. These people ignore the fact that the studies of our scholars and
the civil administration of our ofﬁcials also require steadyapplication and
practicebeforeefﬁciencyisreached. Theancientswereparticularlychary
of allowing mere novices to botch their work.67Weapons are baneful68
and ﬁghting perilous; and useless unless a general is in constant practice,
he ought not to hazard other men’s lives in battle.69Hence it is essential
that Sun Tzu’s 13 chapters should be studied.
Hsiang Liang used to instruct his nephew Chi70in the art of war. Chi got
a rough idea of the art in its general bearings, but would not pursue his
studiestotheirproperoutcome,theconsequencebeingthathewasﬁnally
defeated and overthrown. He did not realize that the tricks and artiﬁces
of war are beyond verbal computation. Duke Hsiang of Sung and King
Yen of Hsu were brought to destruction by their misplaced humanity. The
treacherous and underhand nature of war necessitates the use of guile and
stratagem suited to the occasion. There is a case on record of Confucius
himself having violated an extorted oath,71and also of his having left the
Sung State in disguise.72Can we then recklessly arraign Sun Tzu for dis-
regarding truth and honesty?
66See XIII. ss. 11, note.
67This is a rather obscure allusion to the TSO CHUAN, where Tzu-ch‘an says: "If you have a piece of
beautiful brocade, you will not employ a mere learner to make it up."
68Cf. TAO TE CHING, ch. 31.
69Sun Hsing-yen might have quoted Confucius again. See LUN YU, XIII. 29, 30.
70Better known as Hsiang Yu [233-202 B.C.].
71SHIH CHI, ch. 47.
72SHIH CHI, ch. 38.
Bibliography
[1] WUTZU,in1CHUANor6chapters.ByWuCh‘i(d.381B.C.).Agenuinework.
See SHIH CHI, ch. 65.
[2] SSU-MA FA, in 1 CHUAN or 5 chapters. Wrongly attributed to Ssu-ma Jang-chu
ofthe6thcenturyB.C.Itsdate,however,mustbeearly,asthecustomsofthethree
ancientdynastiesareconstantlytobemetwithinitspages.SeeSHIHCHI,ch.64.
The SSU K‘U CH‘UAN SHU (ch. 99, f. 1) remarks that the oldest three treatises
on war, SUN TZU, WU TZU and SSU-MA FA, are, generally speaking, only
concerned with things strictly military – the art of producing, collecting, training
and drilling troops, and the correct theory with regard to measures of expediency,
laying plans, transport of goods and the handling of soldiers – in strong contrast
to later works, in which the science of war is usually blended with metaphysics,
divination and magical artsin general.
[3] LIUT‘AO,in6CHUAN,or60chapters.AttributedtoLuWang(orLuShang,also
knownasT‘aiKung)ofthe12thcenturyB.C.73Butitsstyledoesnotbelongtothe
era of the Three Dynasties. Lu Te-ming (550-625 A.D.) mentions the work, and
enumerates the headings of the six sections so that the forgery cannot have been
later than Sui dynasty.
[4] WEILIAOTZU,in5CHUAN.AttributedtoWeiLiao(4thcent.B.C.),whostud-
iedunderthefamousKuei-kuTzu.Theworkappearstohavebeenoriginallyin31
chapters,whereasthetextwepossesscontainsonly24.Itsmatterissoundenough
in the main, though the strategical devices differ considerably from those of the
Warring States period. It is been furnished with a commentary by the well-known
Sung philosopher Chang Tsai.
[5] SANLUEH,in3CHUAN.AttributedtoHuang-shihKung,alegendarypersonage
who is said to have bestowed it on Chang Liang (d. 187 B.C.) in an interview on a
bridge. But here again, the style is not that of works dating from the Ch‘in or Han
period.TheHanEmperorKuangWu[25-57A.D.]apparentlyquotesfromitinone
of his proclamations; but the passage in question may have been inserted later on,
73See XIII. ss. 27, note. Further details on T‘ai Kung will be found in the SHIH CHI, ch. 32 ad init.
Besides the tradition which makes him a former minister of Chou Hsin, two other accounts of him are there
given, according to which he would appear to have been ﬁrst raised from a humble private station by Wen
Wang.
26
BIBLIOGRAPHY 27
inordertoprovethegenuinenessofthework.Weshallnotbefaroutifwereferit
to the Northern Sung period [420-478 A.D.], or somewhat earlier.
[6] LIWEIKUNGWENTUI,in3sections.Writtenintheformofadialoguebetween
T‘aiTsungandhisgreatgeneralLiChing,itisusuallyascribedtothelatter.Com-
petentauthoritiesconsideritaforgery,thoughtheauthorwasevidentlywellversed
in the art of war.
[7] LI CHING PING FA (not to be confounded with the foregoing) is a short treatise
in 8 chapters, preserved in the T‘ung Tien, but not published separately. This fact
explains its omission from the SSU K‘U CH‘UAN SHU.
[8] WU CH‘I CHING, in 1 CHUAN. Attributed to the legendary minister Feng Hou,
with exegetical notes by Kung-sun Hung of the Han dynasty (d. 121 B.C.), and
said to have been eulogized by the celebrated general Ma Lung (d. 300 A.D.). Yet
the earliest mention of it is in the SUNG CHIH. Although a forgery, the work is
well put together.
ConsideringthehighpopularestimationinwhichChu-koLianghasalwaysbeenheld,
it isnot surprising toﬁnd morethan onework onwar ascribedto hispen. Suchare (1)
theSHIHLIUTS‘E(1CHUAN),preservedintheYUNGLOTATIEN;(2)CHIANG
YUAN (1 CHUAN); and (3) HSIN SHU (1 CHUAN), which steals wholesale from
Sun Tzu. None of these has the slightest claim to be considered genuine.
Most of the large Chinese encyclopedias contain extensive sections devoted to the
literature of war. The followingreferences may be found useful:
T‘UNG TIEN (circa 800 A.D.), ch. 148-162.
T‘AI P‘ING YU LAN (983), ch. 270-359.
WEN HSIEN TUNG K‘AO (13th cent.), ch. 221.
YU HAI (13th cent.), ch. 140, 141.
SAN TS‘AI T‘U HUI (16th cent).
KUANG PO WU CHIH (1607), ch. 31, 32.
CH‘IEN CH‘IO LEI SHU (1632), ch. 75.
YUAN CHIEN LEI HAN (1710), ch. 206-229.
KUCHINT‘USHUCHICH‘ENG(1726),sectionXXX,esp. ch. 81-90.
HSU WEN HSIEN T‘UNG K‘AO (1784), ch. 121-134.
HUANG CH‘AO CHING SHIH WEN PIEN (1826), ch. 76, 77.
The bibliographical sections of certain historical works also deserve mention:
BIBLIOGRAPHY 28
CH‘IEN HAN SHU, ch. 30.
SUI SHU, ch. 32-35.
CHIU T‘ANG SHU, ch. 46, 47.
HSIN T‘ANG SHU, ch. 57,60.
SUNG SHIH, ch. 202-209.
T‘UNG CHIH (circa 1150),ch. 68.
To these of course must be added the great Catalogue of the Imperial Library:
SSU K‘U CH‘UAN SHU TSUNG MU T‘I YAO (1790), ch. 99, 100.
ThepreviouslymentionedworksaretheoldestChinesetreatisesonwar,afterSunTzu.
The notes on each have been drawn principally from the SSU K‘U CH‘UAN SHU
CHIEN MING MU LU, ch. 9, fol. 22 sqq.
Chapter 2
LAYING PLANS
[Ts‘aoKung,indeﬁningthemeaningoftheChineseforthetitleofthischapter,saysit
refers to the deliberations in the temple selected by the general for his temporary use,
or as we should say, in his tent. See. ss. 26.]
1. Sun Tzu said: The artof war is of vital importance to the State.
2. It is a matter of life and death, a road either to safety or to ruin. Hence it
is a subject of inquiry which can on no account be neglected.
3. The art of war, then, is governed by ﬁve constant factors, to be taken into
account in one’s deliberations, when seeking to determine the conditions
obtaining in the ﬁeld.
4. These are: (1) The Moral Law; (2) Heaven; (3) Earth; (4) The Com-
mander; (5) Method and discipline.
[ItappearsfromwhatfollowsthatSunTzumeansby"MoralLaw"aprin-
ciple of harmony, not unlike the Tao of Lao Tzu in its moral aspect. One
might be tempted to render it by "morale," were it not considered as an
attribute of the ruler in ss. 13.]
5., 6. The MORAL LAW causes the people to be in complete accord with their
ruler,sothattheywillfollowhimregardlessoftheirlives,undismayedby
any danger.
[TuYuquotesWangTzuassaying: "Withoutconstantpractice,theofﬁcers
willbenervousandundecidedwhenmusteringforbattle;withoutconstant
practice, the general will be wavering and irresolute when the crisis is at
hand."]
7. HEAVEN signiﬁes night and day, cold and heat, times and seasons.
[The commentators, I think, make an unnecessary mystery of two words
here. Meng Shih refers to "the hard and the soft, waxing and waning" of
29
CHAPTER 2. LAYING PLANS 30
Heaven. Wang Hsi, however, may be right in saying that what is meant
is "the general economy of Heaven," including the ﬁve elements, the four
seasons, wind and clouds, and other phenomena.]
8. EARTH comprises distances, great and small; danger and security; open
ground and narrow passes; the chances of life and death.
9. TheCOMMANDERstandsforthevirtuesofwisdom,sincerely,benevol-
ence, courage and strictness.
[TheﬁvecardinalvirtuesoftheChineseare(1)humanityorbenevolence;
(2)uprightnessofmind;(3)self-respect,self-control,or"properfeeling;"
(4) wisdom; (5) sincerity or good faith. Here "wisdom" and "sincerity"
are put before "humanity or benevolence," and the two military virtues of
"courage"and"strictness"substitutedfor"uprightnessofmind"and"self-
respect, self-control, or ’proper feeling.’"]
10. By METHOD AND DISCIPLINE are to be understood the marshaling
of the army in its proper subdivisions, the graduations of rank among the
ofﬁcers, the maintenance of roads by which supplies may reach the army,
and the control of militaryexpenditure.
11. These ﬁve heads should be familiar to every general: he who knows them
will be victorious; he whoknows them not will fail.
12. Therefore, in your deliberations, when seeking to determine the military
conditions, let them be made the basis of a comparison, in this wise:
13. (1) Which of the two sovereigns is imbued with the Moral law?
[I.e., "is in harmony with his subjects." Cf. ss. 5.]
(2) Which of the two generals has most ability?
(3) With whom lie the advantages derived from Heaven and Earth?
[See ss. 7,8]
(4) On which side is discipline most rigorously enforced?
[Tu Mu alludes to the remarkable story of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao (A.D. 155-220),
whowassuchastrictdisciplinarianthatonce,inaccordancewithhisown
severeregulationsagainstinjurytostandingcrops,hecondemnedhimself
todeathforhavingallowedhimhorsetoshyintoaﬁeldofcorn! However,
in lieu of losing his head, he was persuaded to satisfy his sense of justice
bycuttingoffhishair. Ts‘aoTs‘ao’sowncommentonthepresentpassage
is characteristically curt: "when you lay down a law, see that it is not
disobeyed; if it is disobeyed the offender must be put to death."]
(5) Which army is stronger?
CHAPTER 2. LAYING PLANS 31
[Morally as well as physically. As Mei Yao-ch‘en puts it, freely rendered,
"ESPIRIT DE CORPS and ’big battalions.’"]
(6) On which side are ofﬁcers and men more highly trained?
[TuYuquotesWangTzuassaying: "Withoutconstantpractice,theofﬁcers
willbenervousandundecidedwhenmusteringforbattle;withoutconstant
practice, the general will be wavering and irresolute when the crisis is at
hand."]
(7) In which army is there the greater constancy both in reward and pun-
ishment?
[Onwhichsideistherethemostabsolutecertaintythatmeritwillbeprop-
erly rewarded and misdeeds summarily punished?]
14. By means of these seven considerations I can forecast victory or defeat.
15. The general that hearkens to my counsel and acts upon it, will con-
quer: –let such a one be retained in command! The general that hearkens
not to my counsel nor acts upon it, will suffer defeat: –let such a one be
dismissed!
[The form of this paragraph reminds us that Sun Tzu’s treatise was com-
posedexpresslyforthebeneﬁtofhispatronHoLu,kingoftheWuState.]
16. While heading the proﬁt of my counsel, avail yourself also of any helpful
circumstances over and beyond the ordinary rules.
17. Accordingascircumstancesarefavorable,oneshouldmodifyone’splans.
[Sun Tzu, as a practical soldier, will have none of the "bookish theoric."
He cautions us here not to pin our faith to abstract principles; "for," as
Chang Yu puts it, "while the main laws of strategy can be stated clearly
enough for the beneﬁt of all and sundry, you must be guided by the ac-
tions of the enemy in attempting to secure a favorable position in actual
warfare." On the eve of the battle of Waterloo, Lord Uxbridge, command-
ing the cavalry, went to the Duke of Wellington in order to learn what his
plans and calculations were for the morrow, because, as he explained, he
might suddenly ﬁnd himself Commander-in-chief and would be unable to
frame new plans in a critical moment. The Duke listened quietly and then
said: "Who will attack the ﬁrst tomorrow – I or Bonaparte?" "Bonaparte,"
replied Lord Uxbridge. "Well," continued the Duke, "Bonaparte has not
given me any idea of his projects; and as my plans will depend upon his,
how can you expect me to tell you what mine are?"1]
18. All warfare is basedon deception.
1[1] "Words on Wellington," by Sir. W. Fraser.
CHAPTER 2. LAYING PLANS 32
[The truth of this pithy and profound saying will be admitted by every
soldier. Col. Henderson tells us that Wellington, great in so many milit-
aryqualities,wasespeciallydistinguishedby"theextraordinaryskillwith
which he concealed his movements and deceived both friend and foe."]
19. Hence,whenabletoattack,wemustseemunable;whenusingourforces,
we must seem inactive; when we are near, we must make the enemy be-
lieve we are far away; when far away, we must make him believe we are
near.
20. Hold out baits to entice the enemy. Feign disorder, and crush him.
[All commentators, except Chang Yu, say, "When he is in disorder, crush
him."ItismorenaturaltosupposethatSunTzuisstillillustratingtheuses
of deception in war.]
21. If he is secure at all points, be prepared for him. If he is in superior
strength, evade him.
22. If your opponent is of choleric temper, seek to irritate him. Pretend to be
weak, that he may grow arrogant.
[Wang Tzu, quoted by Tu Yu, says that the good tactician plays with his
adversaryasacatplayswithamouse,ﬁrstfeigningweaknessandimmob-
ility, and then suddenly pouncing upon him.]
23. If he is taking his ease, give him no rest.
[This isprobably the meaning though MeiYao-ch‘en has thenote: "while
we are taking our ease, wait for the enemy to tire himself out." The YU
LAN has "Lure him on and tire him out."]
If his forces are united, separate them.
[Less plausibleis the interpretationfavored by most ofthe commentators:
"If sovereign and subject arein accord, put division between them."]
24. Attack him where heis unprepared, appear where you are not expected.
25. These military devices, leading to victory, must not be divulged before-
hand.
26. Nowthegeneralwhowinsabattlemakesmanycalculationsinhistemple
ere the battle is fought.
[ChangYutellsusthatinancienttimesitwascustomaryforatempletobe
set apart for the use of a general who was about to take the ﬁeld, in order
that he might there elaborate his plan of campaign.]
The general who loses a battle makes but few calculations beforehand. Thus do many
calculations lead to victory, and few calculations to defeat: how much more no calcu-
lation at all! It is by attention to this point that I can foresee who is likely to win or
lose.
Chapter 3
WAGING WAR
[Ts‘ao Kung has the note: "He who wishes to ﬁght must ﬁrst count the cost," which
preparesusforthediscoverythatthesubjectofthechapterisnotwhatwemightexpect
from the title, but is primarily a consideration of ways and means.]
1. SunTzusaid: Intheoperationsofwar,wherethereareintheﬁeldathou-
sandswiftchariots,asmanyheavychariots,andahundredthousandmail-
clad soldiers,
[The "swift chariots" were lightly built and, according to Chang Yu, used
for the attack; the "heavy chariots" were heavier, and designed for pur-
poses of defense. Li Ch‘uan, it is true, says that the latter were light, but
this seems hardly probable. It is interesting to note the analogies between
early Chinese warfare and that of the Homeric Greeks. In each case, the
war- chariot was the important factor, forming as it did the nucleus round
which was grouped a certain number of foot-soldiers. With regard to the
numbers given here, we are informed that each swift chariot was accom-
panied by 75 footmen, and each heavy chariot by 25 footmen, so that the
whole army would be divided up into a thousand battalions, each consist-
ing of two chariots and a hundred men.]
with provisions enough to carry them a thousand LI,
[2.78 modern LI go to a mile. The length may have varied slightly since
Sun Tzu’s time.]
theexpenditureathomeandatthefront,includingentertainmentofguests,
small items such as glue and paint, and sums spent on chariots and armor,
willreachthetotalofathousandouncesofsilverperday. Suchisthecost
of raising an army of 100,000men.
2. When you engage in actual ﬁghting, if victory is long in coming, then
men’s weapons will grow dull and their ardor will be damped. If you lay
siege to a town, you will exhaust your strength.
33
CHAPTER 3. WAGING WAR 34
3. Again, if the campaign is protracted, the resources of the State will not be
equal to the strain.
4. Now, when your weapons are dulled, your ardor damped, your strength
exhausted and your treasure spent, other chieftains will spring up to take
advantage of your extremity. Then no man, however wise, will be able to
avert the consequences thatmust ensue.
5. Thus, though we have heard of stupid haste in war, cleverness has never
been seen associated withlong delays.
[This concise and difﬁcult sentence is not well explained by any of the
commentators. Ts‘ao Kung, Li Ch‘uan, Meng Shih, Tu Yu, Tu Mu and
Mei Yao-ch‘en have notes to the effect that a general, though naturally
stupid, may nevertheless conquer through sheer force of rapidity. Ho
Shih says: "Haste may be stupid, but at any rate it saves expenditure of
energy and treasure; protracted operations may be very clever, but they
bring calamity in their train." Wang Hsi evades the difﬁculty by remark-
ing: "Lengthyoperationsmeananarmygrowingold,wealthbeingexpen-
ded, an empty exchequer and distress among the people; true cleverness
insures against the occurrence of such calamities." Chang Yu says: "So
long as victory can be attained, stupid haste is preferable to clever dilat-
oriness." Now Sun Tzu says nothing whatever, except possibly by implic-
ation, about ill-considered haste being better than ingenious but lengthy
operations. What he does say is something much more guarded, namely
that, while speed may sometimes be injudicious, tardiness can never be
anything but foolish – if only because it means impoverishment to the na-
tion. In considering the point raised here by Sun Tzu, the classic example
of Fabius Cunctator will inevitably occur to the mind. That general de-
liberately measured the endurance of Rome against that of Hannibals’s
isolated army, because it seemed to him that the latter was more likely to
suffer from a long campaign in a strange country. But it is quite a moot
questionwhetherhistacticswouldhaveprovedsuccessfulinthelongrun.
Their reversal it is true, led to Cannae; but this only establishes a negative
presumption in their favor.]
6. Thereisnoinstanceofacountryhavingbeneﬁtedfromprolongedwarfare.
7. It is only one who is thoroughly acquainted with the evils of war that can
thoroughly understand the proﬁtable way of carrying it on.
[That is, with rapidity. Only one who knows the disastrous effects of a
long war can realize the supreme importance of rapidity in bringing it to
a close. Only two commentators seem to favor this interpretation, but it
ﬁts well into the logic of the context, whereas the rendering, "He who
doesnotknowtheevilsofwarcannotappreciateitsbeneﬁts,"isdistinctly
pointless.]
CHAPTER 3. WAGING WAR 35
8. The skillful soldier does not raise a second levy, neither are his supply-
wagons loaded more than twice.
[Oncewarisdeclared,hewillnotwasteprecioustimeinwaitingforrein-
forcements,norwillhereturnhisarmybackforfreshsupplies,butcrosses
theenemy’sfrontierwithoutdelay. Thismayseemanaudaciouspolicyto
recommend, but with all great strategists, from Julius Caesar to Napoleon
Bonaparte, the value of time – that is, being a little ahead of your oppon-
ent – has counted for more than either numerical superiority or the nicest
calculations with regard tocommissariat.]
9. Bring war material with you from home, but forage on the enemy. Thus
the army will have food enough for its needs.
[TheChinesewordtranslatedhereas"warmaterial"literallymeans"things
to be used", and is meant in the widest sense. It includes all the impedi-
menta of an army, apart fromprovisions.]
10. Poverty of the State exchequer causes an army to be maintained by con-
tributions from a distance. Contributing to maintain an army at a distance
causes the people to be impoverished.
[The beginning of this sentence does not balance properly with the next,
though obviously intended to do so. The arrangement, moreover, is so
awkwardthatIcannothelpsuspectingsomecorruptioninthetext. Itnever
seems to occur to Chinese commentators that an emendation may be ne-
cessary for the sense, and we get no help from them there. The Chinese
words Sun Tzu used to indicate the cause of the people’s impoverishment
clearlyhavereferencetosomesystembywhichthehusbandmensenttheir
contributions of corn to the army direct. But why should it fall on them to
maintain an army in this way, except because the State or Government is
too poor to do so?]
11. On the other hand, the proximity of an army causes prices to go up; and
high prices cause the people’s substance to be drained away.
[WangHsisayshighpricesoccurbeforethearmyhasleftitsownterritory.
Ts‘aoKungunderstandsitofanarmythathasalreadycrossedthefrontier.]
12. When their substance is drained away, the peasantry will be afﬂicted by
heavy exactions.
13.,14. With this loss of substance and exhaustion of strength, the homes of the
people will be stripped bare, and three-tenths of their income will be dis-
sipated;
[Tu Mu and Wang Hsi agree that the people are not mulcted not of 3/10,
but of 7/10, of their income. But this is hardly to be extracted from our
text. Ho Shih has a characteristic tag: "The PEOPLE being regarded as
CHAPTER 3. WAGING WAR 36
the essential part of the State, and FOOD as the people’s heaven, is it not
right that those in authority should value and be careful of both?"]
while government expenses for broken chariots, worn-out horses, breast-
platesandhelmets,bowsandarrows,spearsandshields,protectivemantles,
draught-oxenandheavywagons,willamounttofour-tenthsofitstotalrev-
enue.
15. Hence a wise general makes a point of foraging on the enemy. One cart-
load of the enemy’s provisions is equivalent to twenty of one’s own, and
likewise a single PICUL of his provender is equivalent to twenty from
one’s own store.
[Becausetwentycartloadswillbeconsumedintheprocessoftransporting
one cartload to the front. A PICUL is a unit of measure equal to 133.3
pounds (65.5 kilograms).]
16. Nowinordertokilltheenemy,ourmenmustberousedtoanger;thatthere
maybeadvantagefromdefeatingtheenemy,theymusthavetheirrewards.
[Tu Mu says: "Rewards are necessary in order to make the soldiers see
the advantage of beating the enemy; thus, when you capture spoils from
the enemy, they must be used as rewards, so that all your men may have a
keen desire to ﬁght, each onhis own account."]
17. Therefore in chariot ﬁghting, when ten or more chariots have been taken,
those should be rewarded who took the ﬁrst. Our own ﬂags should be
substituted for those of the enemy, and the chariots mingled and used in
conjunction with ours. The captured soldiers should be kindly treated and
kept.
18. This is called, usingthe conquered foe to augment one’s own strength.
19. In war, then, let your great object be victory, not lengthy campaigns.
[AsHoShihremarks: "Warisnotathingtobetriﬂedwith."SunTzuhere
reiterates the main lesson which this chapter is intended to enforce."]
20. Thusitmaybeknownthattheleaderofarmiesisthearbiterofthepeople’s
fate, the man on whom it depends whether the nation shall be in peace or
in peril.
Chapter 4
ATTACK BY STRATAGEM
1. Sun Tzu said: In the practical art of war, the best thing of all is to take the
enemy’s country whole and intact; to shatter and destroy it is not so good.
So,too,itisbettertorecaptureanarmyentirethantodestroyit,tocapture
a regiment, a detachment or a company entire than to destroy them.
[Theequivalenttoanarmycorps,accordingtoSsu-maFa,consistednom-
inally of 12500 men; according to Ts‘ao Kung, the equivalent of a regi-
mentcontained500men,theequivalenttoadetachmentconsistsfromany
number between 100 and 500, and the equivalent of a company contains
from 5 to 100 men. For the last two, however, Chang Yu gives the exact
ﬁgures of 100 and 5 respectively.]
2. Hence to ﬁght and conquer in all your battles is not supreme excellence;
supreme excellence consists in breaking the enemy’s resistance without
ﬁghting.
[Here again, no modern strategist but will approve the words of the old
Chinese general. Moltke’s greatest triumph, the capitulation of the huge
French army at Sedan, waswon practically without bloodshed.]
3. Thus the highest formof generalship is to balk the enemy’s plans;
[Perhaps the word "balk" falls short of expressing the full force of the
Chinese word, which implies not an attitude of defense, whereby one
might be content to foil the enemy’s stratagems one after another, but an
activepolicyofcounter-attack. HoShihputsthisveryclearlyinhisnote:
"Whentheenemyhasmadeaplanofattackagainstus,wemustanticipate
him by delivering our own attack ﬁrst."]
the next best is to prevent the junction of the enemy’s forces;
[Isolating him from his allies. We must not forget that Sun Tzu, in speak-
ing of hostilities, always has in mind the numerous states or principalities
into which the China of hisday was split up.]
37
CHAPTER 4. ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 38
the next in order is to attack the enemy’s army in the ﬁeld;
[When he is already at fullstrength.]
and the worst policy of all is to besiege walled cities.
4. The rule is, not to besiege walled cities if it can possibly be avoided.
[Another sound piece of military theory. Had the Boers acted upon it
in 1899, and refrained from dissipating their strength before Kimberley,
Mafeking, or even Ladysmith, it is more than probable that they would
have been masters of the situation before the British were ready seriously
to oppose them.]
The preparation of mantlets, movable shelters, and various implements of
war, will take up three whole months;
[It is not quite clear what the Chinese word, here translated as "mantlets",
described. Ts‘ao Kung simply deﬁnes them as "large shields," but we get
a better idea of them from Li Ch‘uan, who says they were to protect the
heads of those who were assaulting the city walls at close quarters. This
seems to suggest a sort of Roman TESTUDO, ready made. Tu Mu says
they were wheeled vehicles used in repelling attacks, but this is denied
by Ch‘en Hao. See supra II. 14. The name is also applied to turrets on
citywalls. Ofthe"movableshelters"wegetafairlycleardescriptionfrom
severalcommentators. Theywerewoodenmissile-proofstructuresonfour
wheels, propelled from within, covered over with raw hides, and used in
sieges to convey parties of men to and from the walls, for the purpose of
ﬁlling up the encircling moat with earth. Tu Mu adds that they are now
called "wooden donkeys."]
and the piling up of mounds over against the walls will take three months
more.
[These were great mounds or ramparts of earth heaped up to the level of
the enemy’s walls in order to discover the weak points in the defense, and
also to destroy the fortiﬁed turrets mentioned in the preceding note.]
5. The general, unable to control his irritation, will launch his men to the
assault like swarming ants,
[This vivid simile of Ts‘ao Kung is taken from the spectacle of an army
of ants climbing a wall. The meaning is that the general, losing patience
atthelongdelay,maymakeaprematureattempttostormtheplacebefore
his engines of war are ready.]
with the result that one-third of his men are slain, while the town still
remains untaken. Such arethe disastrous effects of a siege.
CHAPTER 4. ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 39
[WeareremindedoftheterriblelossesoftheJapanesebeforePortArthur,
in the most recent siege which history has to record.]
6. Thereforetheskillfulleadersubduestheenemy’stroopswithoutanyﬁght-
ing; he captures their cities without laying siege to them; he overthrows
their kingdom without lengthy operations in the ﬁeld.
[ChiaLinnotesthatheonlyoverthrowstheGovernment,butdoesnoharm
toindividuals. TheclassicalinstanceisWuWang,whoafterhavingputan
endtotheYindynastywasacclaimed"Fatherandmotherofthepeople."]
7. With his forces intact he will dispute the mastery of the Empire, and thus,
without losing a man, his triumph will be complete.
[Owing to the double meanings in the Chinese text, the latter part of
the sentence is susceptible of quite a different meaning: "And thus, the
weapon not being blunted byuse, its keenness remains perfect."]
This is the method of attacking by stratagem.
8. It is the rule in war, if our forces are ten to the enemy’s one, to surround
him; if ﬁve to one, to attack him;
[Straightway, without waiting for any further advantage.]
if twice as numerous, to divide our army into two.
[Tu Mu takes exception to the saying; and at ﬁrst sight, indeed, it appears
to violate a fundamental principle of war. Ts’ao Kung, however, gives a
clue to Sun Tzu’s meaning: "Being two to the enemy’s one, we may use
one part of our army in the regular way, and the other for some special
diversion." Chang Yu thus further elucidates the point: "If our force is
twice as numerous as that of the enemy, it should be split up into two
divisions, one to meet the enemy in front, and one to fall upon his rear;
if he replies to the frontal attack, he may be crushed from behind; if to
the rearwardattack, he may becrushed in front."This is what ismeant by
sayingthat’onepartmaybeusedintheregularway,andtheotherforsome
special diversion.’ Tu Mu does not understand that dividing one’s army
is simply an irregular, just as concentrating it is the regular, strategical
method, and he is too hastyin calling this a mistake."]
9. If equally matched, we can offer battle;
[Li Ch‘uan, followed by Ho Shih, gives the following paraphrase: "If at-
tackersandattackedareequallymatchedinstrength,onlytheablegeneral
will ﬁght."]
if slightly inferior in numbers, we can avoid the enemy;
CHAPTER 4. ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 40
[The meaning, "we can WATCH the enemy," is certainly a great improve-
ment on the above; but unfortunately there appears to be no very good
authorityforthevariant. ChangYuremindsusthatthesayingonlyapplies
if the other factors are equal; a small difference in numbers is often more
than counterbalanced by superior energy and discipline.]
if quite unequal in every way, we can ﬂee from him.
10. Hence,thoughanobstinateﬁghtmaybemadebyasmallforce,intheend
it must be captured by thelarger force.
11. Now the general is the bulwark of the State; if the bulwark is complete at
all points; the State will be strong; if the bulwark is defective, the State
will be weak.
[As Li Ch‘uan tersely puts it: "Gap indicates deﬁciency; if the general’s
ability is not perfect (i.e. if he is not thoroughly versed in his profession),
his army will lack strength."]
12. Therearethreewaysinwhicharulercanbringmisfortuneuponhisarmy:
13. (1) By commanding the army to advance or to retreat, being ignorant of
the fact that it cannot obey. This is called hobbling the army.
[Li Ch‘uan adds the comment: "It is like tying together the legs of a thor-
oughbred,sothatitisunabletogallop."Onewouldnaturallythinkof"the
ruler"inthispassageasbeingathome,andtryingtodirectthemovements
of his army from a distance. But the commentators understand just the
reverse, and quote the saying of T‘ai Kung: "A kingdom should not be
governedfromwithout,andarmyshouldnotbedirectedfromwithin."Of
course it is true that, during an engagement, or when in close touch with
the enemy, the general should not be in the thick of his own troops, but a
little distance apart. Otherwise, he will be liable to misjudge the position
as a whole, and give wrong orders.]
14. (2) By attempting to govern an army in the same way as he administers a
kingdom, being ignorant of the conditions which obtain in an army. This
causes restlessness in the soldier’s minds.
[Ts‘aoKung’snoteis,freelytranslated: "Themilitarysphereandthecivil
sphere are wholly distinct; you can’t handle an army in kid gloves." And
Chang Yu says: "Humanity and justice are the principles on which to
govern a state, but not an army; opportunism and ﬂexibility, on the other
hand, are military rather than civil virtues to assimilate the governing of
an army"–to that of a State, understood.]
15. (3) By employing theofﬁcers of his army without discrimination,
[That is, he is not carefulto use the right man in the right place.]
CHAPTER 4. ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 41
throughignoranceofthemilitaryprincipleofadaptationtocircumstances.
This shakes the conﬁdenceof the soldiers.
[I follow Mei Yao-ch‘en here. The other commentators refer not to the
ruler,asinSS.13,14,buttotheofﬁcersheemploys. ThusTuYusays: "If
ageneralisignorantoftheprincipleofadaptability,hemustnotbeentrus-
ted with a position of authority." Tu Mu quotes: "The skillful employer
of men will employ the wise man, the brave man, the covetous man, and
the stupid man. For the wise man delights in establishing his merit, the
brave man likes to show his courage in action, the covetous man is quick
at seizing advantages, andthe stupid man has no fear of death."]
16. Butwhenthearmyisrestlessanddistrustful,troubleissuretocomefrom
the other feudal princes. This is simply bringing anarchy into the army,
and ﬂinging victory away.
17. Thus we may know that there are ﬁve essentials for victory: (1) He will
win who knows when to ﬁghtand when not to ﬁght.
[Chang Yu says: If he can ﬁght, he advances and takes the offensive; if
he cannot ﬁght, he retreats and remains on the defensive. He will invari-
ably conquer who knows whether it is right to take the offensive or the
defensive.]
(2)Hewillwinwhoknowshowtohandlebothsuperiorandinferiorforces.
[This is not merely the general’s ability to estimate numbers correctly, as
Li Ch‘uan and others make out. Chang Yu expounds the saying more sat-
isfactorily: "By applying the art of war, it is possible with a lesser force
to defeat a greater, and vice versa. The secret lies in an eye for locality,
and in not letting the right moment slip. Thus Wu Tzu says: ’With a su-
periorforce,makeforeasyground;withaninferiorone,makefordifﬁcult
ground.’"]
(3) He will win whose army is animated by the same spirit throughout all
its ranks.
(4) He will win who, prepared himself, waits to take the enemy unpre-
pared.
(5)Hewillwinwhohasmilitarycapacityandisnotinterferedwithbythe
sovereign.
[Tu Yu quotes Wang Tzu as saying: "It is the sovereign’s function to give
broadinstructions,buttodecideonbattleitisthefunctionofthegeneral."
Itisneedlesstodilateonthemilitarydisasterswhichhavebeencausedby
undueinterferencewithoperationsintheﬁeldonthepartofthehomegov-
ernment. Napoleon undoubtedly owed much of his extraordinary success
to the fact that he was nothampered by central authority.]
CHAPTER 4. ATTACK BY STRATAGEM 42
18. Hence the saying: If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need
not fear the result of a hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the
enemy, for every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat.
[Li Ch‘uan cites the case of Fu Chien, prince of Ch‘in, who in 383 A.D.
marched with a vast army against the Chin Emperor. When warned not to
despise an enemy who could command the services of such men as Hsieh
AnandHuanCh‘ung,heboastfullyreplied: "Ihavethepopulationofeight
provincesatmyback,infantryandhorsementothenumberofonemillion;
why,theycoulddamuptheYangtszeRiveritselfbymerelythrowingtheir
whips into the stream. What danger have I to fear?" Nevertheless, his
forces were soon after disastrously routed at the Fei River, and he was
obliged to beat a hasty retreat.]
If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every
battle.
[Chang Yu said: "Knowing the enemy enables you to take the offensive,
knowingyourselfenablesyoutostandonthedefensive."Headds: "Attack
is the secret of defense; defense is the planning of an attack." It would be
hard to ﬁnd a better epitome of the root-principle of war.]
Chapter 5
TACTICAL DISPOSITIONS
[Ts‘ao Kung explains the Chinese meaning of the words for the title of this chapter:
"marching and countermarching on the part of the two armies with a view to discov-
ering each other’s condition." Tu Mu says: "It is through the dispositions of an army
that its condition may be discovered. Conceal your dispositions, and your condition
will remain secret, which leads to victory,; show your dispositions, and your condition
will become patent, which leads to defeat." Wang Hsi remarks that the good general
can "secure success by modifying his tactics to meet those of the enemy."]
1. Sun Tzu said: The good ﬁghters of old ﬁrst put themselves beyond the
possibility of defeat, and then waited for an opportunity of defeating the
enemy.
2. Tosecureourselvesagainstdefeatliesinourownhands,buttheopportun-
ity of defeating the enemyis provided by the enemy himself.
[That is, of course, by a mistake on the enemy’s part.]
3. Thus the good ﬁghter is able to secure himself against defeat,
[Chang Yu says this is done, "By concealing the disposition of his troops,
covering up his tracks, and taking unremitting precautions."]
but cannot make certain ofdefeating the enemy.
4. Hencethesaying: OnemayKNOWhowtoconquerwithoutbeingableto
DO it.
5. Security against defeat implies defensive tactics; ability to defeat the en-
emy means taking the offensive.
[I retain the sense found in a similar passage in ss. 1-3, in spite of the fact
thatthecommentatorsareallagainstme. Themeaningtheygive,"Hewho
cannot conquer takes the defensive," is plausible enough.]
43
CHAPTER 5. TACTICAL DISPOSITIONS 44
6. Standing on the defensive indicates insufﬁcient strength; attacking, a su-
perabundance of strength.
7. The general who is skilled in defense hides in the most secret recesses of
the earth;
[Literally, "hides under the ninth earth," which is a metaphor indicating
the utmost secrecy and concealment, so that the enemy may not know his
whereabouts."]
hewhoisskilledinattackﬂashesforthfromthetopmostheightsofheaven.
[Another metaphor, implying that he falls on his adversary like a thunder-
bolt,againstwhichthereisnotimetoprepare. Thisistheopinionofmost
of the commentators.]
Thus on the one hand we have ability to protect ourselves; on the other, a
victory that is complete.
8. To see victory only when it is within the ken of the common herd is not
the acme of excellence.
[AsTs‘aoKungremarks,"thethingistoseetheplantbeforeithasgermin-
ated," to foresee the event before the action has begun. Li Ch‘uan alludes
to the story of Han Hsin who, when about to attack the vastly superior
army of Chao, which was strongly entrenched in the city of Ch‘eng-an,
saidtohisofﬁcers: "Gentlemen,wearegoingtoannihilatetheenemy,and
shall meet again at dinner." The ofﬁcers hardly took his words seriously,
and gave a very dubious assent. But Han Hsin had already worked out in
his mind the details of a clever stratagem, whereby, as he foresaw, he was
able to capture the city and inﬂict a crushing defeat on his adversary."]
9. Neitherisittheacmeofexcellenceifyouﬁghtandconquerandthewhole
Empire says, "Well done!"
[Trueexcellencebeing,asTuMusays: "Toplansecretly,tomovesurrepti-
tiously, to foil the enemy’s intentions and balk his schemes, so that at last
the day may be won without shedding a drop of blood." Sun Tzu reserves
his approbation for things that "the world’s coarse thumb And ﬁnger fail
to plumb." ]
10. To lift an autumn hairis no sign of great strength;
["Autumn" hair" is explained as the fur of a hare, which is ﬁnest in au-
tumn, when it begins to grow afresh. The phrase is a very common one in
Chinese writers.]
to see the sun and moon is no sign of sharp sight; to hear the noise of
thunder is no sign of a quickear.
CHAPTER 5. TACTICAL DISPOSITIONS 45
[HoShihgivesasrealinstancesofstrength,sharpsightandquickhearing:
Wu Huo, who could lift a tripod weighing 250 stone; Li Chu, who at a
distance of a hundred paces could see objects no bigger than a mustard
seed; and Shih K‘uang, a blind musician who could hear the footsteps of
a mosquito.]
11. What the ancients called a clever ﬁghter is one who not only wins, but
excels in winning with ease.
[Thelasthalfisliterally"onewho,conquering,excelsineasyconquering."
MeiYao-ch‘ensays: "Hewhoonlyseestheobvious,winshisbattleswith
difﬁculty; he who looks below the surface of things, wins with ease."]
12. Hencehisvictoriesbringhimneitherreputationforwisdomnorcreditfor
courage.
[Tu Mu explains this very well: "Inasmuch as his victories are gained
over circumstances that have not come to light, the world as large knows
nothing of them, and he wins no reputation for wisdom; inasmuch as the
hostile state submits before there has been any bloodshed, he receives no
credit for courage."]
13. He wins his battlesby making no mistakes.
[Ch‘en Hao says: "He plans no superﬂuous marches, he devises no futile
attacks." The connection of ideas is thus explained by Chang Yu: "One
who seeks to conquer by sheer strength, clever though he may be at win-
ning pitched battles, is also liable on occasion to be vanquished; whereas
he who can look into the future and discern conditions that are not yet
manifest, will never makea blunder and therefore invariably win."]
Making no mistakes is what establishes the certainty of victory, for it
means conquering an enemythat is already defeated.
14. Hence the skillful ﬁghter puts himself into a position which makes defeat
impossible, and does not miss the moment for defeating the enemy.
[A "counsel of perfection" as Tu Mu truly observes. "Position" need not
beconﬁnedtotheactualgroundoccupiedbythetroops. Itincludesallthe
arrangementsandpreparationswhichawisegeneralwillmaketoincrease
the safety of his army.]
15. Thus it is that in war the victorious strategist only seeks battle after the
victoryhasbeenwon,whereashewhoisdestinedtodefeatﬁrstﬁghtsand
afterwards looks for victory.
[Ho Shih thus expounds the paradox: "In warfare, ﬁrst lay plans which
willensurevictory,andthenleadyourarmytobattle;ifyouwillnotbegin
with stratagem but rely on brute strength alone, victory will no longer be
assured."]
CHAPTER 5. TACTICAL DISPOSITIONS 46
16. The consummate leader cultivates the moral law, and strictly adheres to
method and discipline; thus it is in his power to control success.
17. Inrespectofmilitarymethod,wehave,ﬁrstly,Measurement;secondly,Es-
timation of quantity; thirdly, Calculation; fourthly, Balancing of chances;
ﬁfthly, Victory.
18. MeasurementowesitsexistencetoEarth;EstimationofquantitytoMeas-
urement; Calculation to Estimation of quantity; Balancing of chances to
Calculation; and Victoryto Balancing of chances.
[ItisnoteasytodistinguishthefourtermsveryclearlyintheChinese. The
ﬁrst seems to be surveying and measurement of the ground, which enable
us to form an estimate of the enemy’s strength, and to make calculations
basedonthedatathusobtained;wearethusledtoageneralweighing-up,
or comparison of the enemy’s chances with our own; if the latter turn the
scale, then victory ensues. The chief difﬁculty lies in third term, which
in the Chinese some commentators take as a calculation of NUMBERS,
thereby making it nearly synonymous with the second term. Perhaps the
secondtermshouldbethoughtofasaconsiderationoftheenemy’sgeneral
position or condition, while the third term is the estimate of his numerical
strength. Ontheotherhand,TuMusays: "Thequestionofrelativestrength
having been settled, we can bring the varied resources of cunning into
play." Ho Shih seconds this interpretation, but weakens it. However, it
points to the third term asbeing a calculation of numbers.]
19. A victorious army opposed to a routed one, is as a pound’s weight placed
in the scale against a single grain.
[Literally, "a victorious army is like an I (20 oz.) weighed against a SHU
(1/24 oz.); a routed army is a SHU weighed against an I." The point is
simply the enormous advantage which a disciplined force, ﬂushed with
victory, has over one demoralized by defeat." Legge, in his note on Men-
cius, I. 2. ix. 2, makes the I to be 24 Chinese ounces, and corrects Chu
Hsi’s statement that it equaled 20 oz. only. But Li Ch‘uan of the T‘ang
dynasty here gives the same ﬁgure as Chu Hsi.]
20. Theonrushofaconqueringforceisliketheburstingofpent-upwatersinto
a chasm a thousand fathoms deep.
Chapter 6
ENERGY
1. Sun Tzu said: The control of a large force is the same principle as the
controlofafewmen: itismerelyaquestionofdividinguptheirnumbers.
[That is, cutting up the army into regiments, companies, etc., with sub-
ordinate ofﬁcers in command of each. Tu Mu reminds us of Han Hsin’s
famous reply to the ﬁrst Han Emperor, who once said to him: "How large
an army do you think I could lead?" "Not more than 100,000 men, your
Majesty." "And you?" asked the Emperor. "Oh!" he answered, "the more
the better."]
2. Fighting with a large army under your command is nowise different from
ﬁghting with a small one: it is merely a question of instituting signs and
signals.
3. To ensure that your whole host may withstand the brunt of the enemy’s
attack and remain unshaken - this is effected by maneuvers direct and in-
direct.
[We now come to one of the most interesting parts of Sun Tzu’s treatise,
the discussion of the CHENG and the CH‘I." As it is by no means easy to
grasp the full signiﬁcance of these two terms, or to render them consist-
ently by good English equivalents; it may be as well to tabulate some of
the commentators’ remarks on the subject before proceeding further. Li
Ch‘uan: "Facing the enemy is CHENG, making lateral diversion is CH‘I.
ChiaLin: "Inpresenceoftheenemy,yourtroopsshouldbearrayedinnor-
mal fashion, but in order to secure victory abnormal maneuvers must be
employed." Mei Yao-ch‘en: "CH‘I is active, CHENG is passive; passivity
means waiting for an opportunity, activity beings the victory itself." Ho
Shih: "We must cause the enemy to regard our straightforward attack as
one that is secretly designed, and vice versa; thus CHENG may also be
CH‘I,andCH‘ImayalsobeCHENG."Heinstancesthefamousexploitof
Han Hsin, who when marching ostensibly against Lin- chin (now Chao-i
47
CHAPTER 6. ENERGY 48
inShensi),suddenlythrewalargeforceacrosstheYellowRiverinwooden
tubs, utterly disconcerting his opponent. [Ch‘ien Han Shu, ch. 3.] Here,
we are told, the march on Lin-chin was CHENG, and the surprise man-
euver was CH‘I." Chang Yu gives the following summary of opinions on
the words: "Military writers do not agree with regard to the meaning of
CH‘I and CHENG. Wei Liao Tzu [4th cent. B.C.] says: ’Direct warfare
favors frontal attacks, indirect warfare attacks from the rear.’ Ts‘ao Kung
says: ’Going straight out to join battle is a direct operation; appearing on
the enemy’s rear is an indirect maneuver.’ Li Wei-kung [6th and 7th cent.
A.D.] says: ’In war, to march straight ahead is CHENG; turning move-
ments,ontheotherhand,areCH‘I.’ThesewriterssimplyregardCHENG
as CHENG, and CH‘I as CH‘I; they do not note that the two are mutually
interchangeable and run into each other like the two sides of a circle [see
infra, ss. 11]. A comment on the T‘ang Emperor T‘ai Tsung goes to the
root of the matter: ’A CH‘I maneuver may be CHENG, if we make the
enemylookuponitasCHENG;thenourrealattackwillbeCH‘I,andvice
versa. The whole secret lies in confusing the enemy, so that he cannot
fathom our real intent.’" To put it perhaps a little more clearly: any attack
or other operation is CHENG, on which the enemy has had his attention
ﬁxed; whereas that is CH‘I," which takes him by surprise or comes from
anunexpectedquarter. Iftheenemyperceivesamovementwhichismeant
to be CH‘I," it immediately becomes CHENG."]
4. That the impact of your army may be like a grindstone dashed against an
egg - this is effected by thescience of weak points and strong.
5. Inallﬁghting,thedirectmethodmaybeusedforjoiningbattle,butindirect
methods will be needed inorder to secure victory.
[Chang Yu says: "Steadily develop indirect tactics, either by pounding
the enemy’s ﬂanks or falling on his rear." A brilliant example of "indirect
tactics"whichdecidedthefortunesofacampaignwasLordRoberts’night
march round the Peiwar Kotal in the second Afghan war.1
6. Indirect tactics, efﬁciently applied, are inexhausible as Heaven and Earth,
unending as the ﬂow of rivers and streams; like the sun and moon, they
endbuttobeginanew;likethefourseasons,theypassawaytoreturnonce
more.
[Tu Yu and Chang Yu understand this of the permutations of CH‘I and
CHENG." But at present Sun Tzu is not speaking of CHENG at all, un-
less, indeed, we suppose with Cheng Yu-hsien that a clause relating to
it has fallen out of the text. Of course, as has already been pointed out,
the two are so inextricably interwoven in all military operations, that they
cannot really be considered apart. Here we simply have an expression, in
ﬁgurative language, of the almost inﬁnite resource of a great leader.]
1"Forty-one Years in India," chapter 46.
CHAPTER 6. ENERGY 49
7. There are not more than ﬁve musical notes, yet the combinations of these
ﬁve give rise to more melodies than can ever be heard.
8. There are not more than ﬁve primary colors (blue, yellow, red, white, and
black), yet in combination they produce more hues than can ever been
seen.
9. Therearenotmorethanﬁvecardinaltastes(sour,acrid,salt,sweet,bitter),
yet combinations of themyield more ﬂavors than can ever be tasted.
10. In battle, there are not more than two methods of attack - the direct and
the indirect; yet these two in combination give rise to an endless series of
maneuvers.
11. The direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn. It is like moving
in a circle - you never come to an end. Who can exhaust the possibilities
of their combination?
12. Theonsetoftroopsisliketherushofatorrentwhichwillevenrollstones
along in its course.
13. The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon which
enables it to strike and destroy its victim.
[TheChinesehereistrickyandacertainkeywordinthecontextitisused
deﬁes the best efforts of the translator. Tu Mu deﬁnes this word as "the
measurement or estimation of distance." But this meaning does not quite
ﬁt the illustrative simile in ss. 15. Applying this deﬁnition to the falcon,
it seems to me to denote that instinct of SELF RESTRAINT which keeps
thebirdfromswoopingonitsquarryuntiltherightmoment,togetherwith
the power of judging when the right moment has arrived. The analogous
quality in soldiers is the highly important one of being able to reserve
theirﬁreuntiltheveryinstantatwhichitwillbemosteffective. Whenthe
"Victory" went into action at Trafalgar at hardly more than drifting pace,
she was for several minutes exposed to a storm of shot and shell before
replyingwithasinglegun. Nelsoncoollywaiteduntilhewaswithinclose
range,whenthebroadsidehebroughttobearworkedfearfulhavoconthe
enemy’s nearest ships.]
14. Therefore the good ﬁghter will be terrible in his onset, and prompt in his
decision.
[Theword"decision"wouldhavereferencetothemeasurementofdistance
mentioned above, letting the enemy get near before striking. But I cannot
help thinking that Sun Tzu meant to use the word in a ﬁgurative sense
comparable to our own idiom "short and sharp." Cf. Wang Hsi’s note,
which after describing the falcon’s mode of attack, proceeds: "This is just
how the ’psychological moment’ should be seized in war."]
CHAPTER 6. ENERGY 50
15. Energy may be likened to the bending of a crossbow; decision, to the
releasing of a trigger.
[None of the commentators seem to grasp the real point of the simile of
energyand theforce storedup in thebent cross- bow until releasedby the
ﬁnger on the trigger.]
16. Amidtheturmoilandtumultofbattle,theremaybeseemingdisorderand
yet no real disorder at all; amid confusion and chaos, your array may be
without head or tail, yet itwill be proof against defeat.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "The subdivisions of the army having been previ-
ously ﬁxed, and the various signals agreed upon, the separating and join-
ing, the dispersing and collecting which will take place in the course of a
battle, may give the appearance of disorder when no real disorder is pos-
sible. Your formation may be without head or tail, your dispositions all
topsy-turvy, and yet a rout ofyour forces quite out of the question."]
17. Simulated disorder postulates perfect discipline, simulated fear postulates
courage; simulated weakness postulates strength.
[In order to make the translation intelligible, it is necessary to tone down
the sharply paradoxical form of the original. Ts‘ao Kung throws out a
hint of the meaning in his brief note: "These things all serve to destroy
formation and conceal one’s condition." But Tu Mu is the ﬁrst to put it
quite plainly: "If you wish to feign confusion in order to lure the enemy
on, you must ﬁrst have perfect discipline; if you wish to display timidity
in order to entrap the enemy, you must have extreme courage; if you wish
to parade your weakness in order to make the enemy over-conﬁdent, you
must have exceeding strength."]
18. Hiding order beneath the cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdi-
vision; [See supra, ss. 1.]
concealing courage under a show of timidity presupposes a fund of latent
energy;
[The commentators strongly understand a certain Chinese word here dif-
ferentlythananywhereelseinthischapter. ThusTuMusays: "seeingthat
we are favorably circumstanced and yet make no move, the enemy will
believe that we are reallyafraid."]
masking strength with weakness is to be effected by tactical dispositions.
[Chang Yu relates the following anecdote of Kao Tsu, the ﬁrst Han Em-
peror: "Wishing to crush the Hsiung-nu, he sent out spies to report on
their condition. But the Hsiung-nu, forewarned, carefully concealed all
their able-bodied men and well-fed horses, and only allowed inﬁrm sol-
diers and emaciated cattle to be seen. The result was that spies one and
CHAPTER 6. ENERGY 51
all recommended the Emperor to deliver his attack. Lou Ching alone op-
posed them, saying: "When two countries go to war, they are naturally
inclined to make an ostentatious display of their strength. Yet our spies
have seen nothing but old age and inﬁrmity. This is surely some ruse
on the part of the enemy, and it would be unwise for us to attack." The
Emperor, however, disregarding this advice, fell into the trap and found
himself surrounded at Po-teng."]
19. Thus one who is skillful at keeping the enemy on the move maintains
deceitful appearances, according to which the enemy will act.
[Ts‘ao Kung’s note is "Make a display of weakness and want." Tu Mu
says: "If our force happens to be superior to the enemy’s, weakness may
be simulated in order to lure him on; but if inferior, he must be led to
believe that we are strong, in order that he may keep off. In fact, all the
enemy’s movements should be determined by the signs that we choose to
give him." Note the following anecdote of Sun Pin, a descendent of Sun
Wu: In341B.C.,theCh‘iStatebeingatwarwithWei,sentT‘ienChiand
Sun Pin against the general P‘ang Chuan, who happened to be a deadly
personalenemyofthelater. SunPinsaid: "TheCh‘iStatehasareputation
for cowardice, and therefore our adversary despises us. Let us turn this
circumstance to account." Accordingly, when the army had crossed the
border into Wei territory, he gave orders to show 100,000 ﬁres on the ﬁrst
night, 50,000 on the next, and the night after only 20,000. P‘ang Chuan
pursued them hotly, saying to himself: "I knew these men of Ch‘i were
cowards: their numbers have already fallen away by more than half." In
his retreat, Sun Pin came to a narrow deﬁle, with he calculated that his
pursuers would reach after dark. Here he had a tree stripped of its bark,
and inscribed upon it the words: "Under this tree shall P‘ang Chuan die."
Then, as night began to fall, he placed a strong body of archers in ambush
near by, with orders to shoot directly they saw a light. Later on, P‘ang
Chuan arrived at the spot, and noticing the tree, struck a light in order to
readwhatwaswrittenonit. Hisbodywasimmediatelyriddledbyavolley
of arrows, and his whole army thrown into confusion. [The above is Tu
Mu’s version of the story; the SHIH CHI, less dramatically but probably
with more historical truth, makes P‘ang Chuan cut his own throat with an
exclamation of despair, after the rout of his army.] ]
He sacriﬁces something,that the enemy may snatch at it.
20. By holding out baits, he keeps him on the march; then with a body of
picked men he lies in waitfor him.
[With an emendation suggested by Li Ching, this then reads, "He lies in
wait with the main body ofhis troops."]
21. Theclevercombatantlookstotheeffectofcombinedenergy,anddoesnot
require too much from individuals.
CHAPTER 6. ENERGY 52
[Tu Mu says: "He ﬁrst of all considers the power of his army in the bulk;
afterwards he takes individual talent into account, and uses each men ac-
cordingtohiscapabilities. Hedoesnotdemandperfectionfromtheuntal-
ented."]
Hence his ability to pick out the right men and utilize combined energy.
22. Whenheutilizescombinedenergy,hisﬁghtingmenbecomeasitwerelike
unto rolling logs or stones. For it is the nature of a log or stone to remain
motionlessonlevelground,andtomovewhenonaslope;iffour-cornered,
to come to a standstill, but if round-shaped, to go rolling down.
[Ts‘au Kung calls this "theuse of natural or inherent power."]
23. Thustheenergydevelopedbygoodﬁghtingmenisasthemomentumofa
round stone rolled down a mountain thousands of feet in height. So much
on the subject of energy.
[The chief lesson of this chapter, in Tu Mu’s opinion, is the paramount
importance in war of rapid evolutions and sudden rushes. "Great results,"
he adds, "can thus be achieved with small forces."]
Chapter 7
WEAK POINTS AND
STRONG
[Chang Yu attempts to explain the sequence of chapters as follows: "Chapter IV, on
Tactical Dispositions, treated of the offensive and the defensive; chapter V, on Energy,
dealt with direct and indirect methods. The good general acquaints himself ﬁrst with
thetheoryofattackanddefense,andthenturnshisattentiontodirectandindirectmeth-
ods. Hestudiestheartofvaryingandcombiningthesetwomethodsbeforeproceeding
tothesubjectofweakandstrongpoints. Fortheuseofdirectorindirectmethodsarises
out of attack and defense, and the perception of weak and strong points depends again
on the above methods. Hence the present chapter comes immediately after the chapter
on Energy."]
1. Sun Tzu said: Whoever is ﬁrst in the ﬁeld and awaits the coming of the
enemy,willbefreshfortheﬁght;whoeverissecondintheﬁeldandhasto
hasten to battle will arrive exhausted.
2. Therefore the clever combatant imposes his will on the enemy, but does
not allow the enemy’s willto be imposed on him.
[One mark of a great soldier is that he ﬁght on his own terms or ﬁghts not
at all.1]
3. By holding out advantages to him, he can cause the enemy to approach of
hisownaccord;or,byinﬂictingdamage,hecanmakeitimpossibleforthe
enemy to draw near.
[Intheﬁrstcase,hewillenticehimwithabait;inthesecond,hewillstrike
at some important point which the enemy will have to defend.]
4. If the enemy is taking his ease, he can harass him;
1See Col. Henderson’s biography of Stonewall Jackson, 1902 ed., vol. II, p. 490.
53
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 54
[This passage may be cited as evidence against Mei Yao- Ch‘en’s inter-
pretation of I. ss. 23.]
if well supplied with food, he can starve him out; if quietly encamped, he
can force him to move.
5. Appearatpointswhichtheenemymusthastentodefend;marchswiftlyto
places where you are not expected.
6. Anarmymaymarchgreatdistanceswithoutdistress,ifitmarchesthrough
country where the enemy isnot.
[Ts‘ao Kung sums up very well: "Emerge from the void [q.d. like "a bolt
from theblue"], strike atvulnerable points, shun places thatare defended,
attack in unexpected quarters."]
7. You can be sure of succeeding in your attacks if you only attack places
which are undefended.
[Wang Hsi explains "undefended places" as "weak points; that is to say,
wherethegeneralislackingincapacity,orthesoldiersinspirit;wherethe
walls are not strong enough, or the precautions not strict enough; where
relief comes too late, or provisions are too scanty, or the defenders are
variance amongst themselves."]
You can ensure the safety of your defense if you only hold positions that
cannot be attacked.
[I.e., where there are none of the weak points mentioned above. There is
rather a nice point involved in the interpretation of this later clause. Tu
Mu, Ch‘en Hao, and Mei Yao-ch‘en assume the meaning to be: "In order
tomakeyourdefensequitesafe,youmustdefendEVENthoseplacesthat
are not likely to be attacked;" and Tu Mu adds: "How much more, then,
those that will be attacked." Taken thus, however, the clause balances less
well with the preceding–always a consideration in the highly antithetical
stylewhichisnaturaltotheChinese. ChangYu,therefore,seemstocome
nearer the mark in saying: "He who is skilled in attack ﬂashes forth from
the topmost heights of heaven [see IV. ss. 7], making it impossible for the
enemy to guard against him. This being so, the places that I shall attack
are precisely those that the enemy cannot defend.... He who is skilled in
defensehidesinthemostsecretrecessesoftheearth,makingitimpossible
fortheenemytoestimatehiswhereabouts. Thisbeingso,theplacesthatI
shall hold are precisely those that the enemy cannot attack."]
8. Hence that general is skillful in attack whose opponent does not know
what to defend; and he is skillful in defense whose opponent does not
know what to attack.
[An aphorism which puts the whole art of war in a nutshell.]
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 55
9. Odivineartofsubtletyandsecrecy! Throughyouwelearntobeinvisible,
through you inaudible;
[Literally, "without form or sound," but it is said of course with reference
to the enemy.]
and hence we can hold the enemy’s fate in our hands.
10. You may advance and be absolutely irresistible, if you make for the en-
emy’s weak points; you may retire and be safe from pursuit if your move-
ments are more rapid thanthose of the enemy.
11. Ifwewishtoﬁght,theenemycanbeforcedtoanengagementeventhough
he be sheltered behind a high rampart and a deep ditch. All we need do is
attack some other place that he will be obliged to relieve.
[Tu Mu says: "If the enemy is the invading party, we can cut his line of
communications and occupy the roads by which he will have to return; if
we are the invaders, we may direct our attack against the sovereign him-
self." It is clear that Sun Tzu, unlike certain generals in the late Boer war,
was no believer in frontal attacks.]
12. Ifwedonotwishtoﬁght,wecanpreventtheenemyfromengaginguseven
though the lines of our encampment be merely traced out on the ground.
All we need do is to throw something odd and unaccountable in his way.
[This extremely concise expression is intelligibly paraphrased by Chia
Lin: "even though we have constructed neither wall nor ditch." Li Ch‘uan
says: "we puzzle him by strange and unusual dispositions;" and Tu Mu
ﬁnallyclinchesthemeaningbythreeillustrativeanecdotes–oneofChu-ko
Liang, who when occupying Yang-p‘ing and about to be attacked by Ssu-
ma I, suddenly struck his colors, stopped the beating of the drums, and
ﬂung open the city gates, showing only a few men engaged in sweeping
and sprinkling the ground. This unexpected proceeding had the intended
effect;forSsu-maI,suspectinganambush,actuallydrewoffhisarmyand
retreated. WhatSunTzuisadvocatinghere,therefore,isnothingmorenor
less than the timely use of "bluff."]
13. Bydiscoveringtheenemy’sdispositionsandremaininginvisibleourselves,
we can keep our forces concentrated, while the enemy’s must be divided.
[Theconclusionisperhapsnotveryobvious,butChangYu(afterMeiYao-
ch‘en)rightlyexplainsitthus: "Iftheenemy’sdispositionsarevisible,we
can make for him in one body; whereas, our own dispositions being kept
secret, the enemy will be obliged to divide his forces in order to guard
against attack from every quarter."]
14. We can form a single united body, while the enemy must split up into
fractions. Hence there will be a whole pitted against separate parts of a
whole, which means that we shall be many to the enemy’s few.
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 56
15. And if we are able thus to attack an inferior force with a superior one, our
opponents will be in dire straits.
16. The spot where we intend to ﬁght must not be made known; for then the
enemy will have to prepare against a possible attack at several different
points;
[Sheridan once explained the reason of General Grant’s victories by say-
ing that "while his opponents were kept fully employed wondering what
he was going to do, HE was thinking most of what he was going to do
himself."]
and his forces being thus distributed in many directions, the numbers we
shall have to face at any given point will be proportionately few.
17. For should the enemy strengthen his van, he will weaken his rear; should
hestrengthenhisrear,hewillweakenhisvan;shouldhestrengthenhisleft,
hewillweakenhisright;shouldhestrengthenhisright,hewillweakenhis
left. If he sends reinforcements everywhere, he will everywhere be weak.
[InFredericktheGreat’sINSTRUCTIONSTOHISGENERALSweread:
"A defensive war is apt to betray us into too frequent detachment. Those
generalswhohavehadbutlittleexperienceattempttoprotecteverypoint,
while those who are better acquainted with their profession, having only
the capital object in view, guard against a decisive blow, and acquiesce in
small misfortunes to avoid greater."]
18. Numerical weakness comes from having to prepare against possible at-
tacks; numerical strength, from compelling our adversary to make these
preparations against us.
[The highest generalship, in Col. Henderson’s words, is "to compel the
enemytodispersehisarmy,andthentoconcentratesuperiorforceagainst
each fraction in turn."]
19. Knowing the place and the time of the coming battle, we may concentrate
from the greatest distances in order to ﬁght.
[What Sun Tzu evidently has in mind is that nice calculation of distances
and that masterly employment of strategy which enable a general to di-
vide his army for the purpose of a long and rapid march, and afterwards
to effect a junction at precisely the right spot and the right hour in order
to confront the enemy in overwhelming strength. Among many such suc-
cessful junctions which military history records, one of the most dramatic
and decisive was the appearance of Blucher just at the critical moment on
the ﬁeld of Waterloo.]
20. Butifneithertimenorplacebeknown,thentheleftwingwillbeimpotent
to succor the right, the right equally impotent to succor the left, the van
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 57
unable to relieve the rear, or the rear to support the van. How much more
so if the furthest portions of the army are anything under a hundred LI
apart, and even the nearestare separated by several LI!
[The Chinese of this last sentence is a little lacking in precision, but the
mental picture we are required to draw is probably that of an army advan-
cing towards a given rendezvous in separate columns, each of which has
orderstobethereonaﬁxeddate. Ifthegeneralallowsthevariousdetach-
ments to proceed at haphazard, without precise instructions as to the time
and place of meeting, the enemy will be able to annihilate the army in de-
tail. Chang Yu’s note may be worth quoting here: "If we do not know the
place where our opponents mean to concentrate or the day on which they
will join battle, our unity will be forfeited through our preparations for
defense, and the positions we hold will be insecure. Suddenly happening
upon a powerful foe, we shall be brought to battle in a ﬂurried condition,
and no mutual support will be possible between wings, vanguard or rear,
especiallyifthereisanygreatdistancebetweentheforemostandhindmost
divisions of the army."]
21. Though according to my estimate the soldiers of Yueh exceed our own in
number, that shall advantage them nothing in the matter of victory. I say
then that victory can be achieved.
[Alas for these brave words! The long feud between the two states ended
in473B.C.withthetotaldefeatofWubyKouChienanditsincorporation
in Yueh. This was doubtless long after Sun Tzu’s death. With his present
assertion compare IV. ss. 4. Chang Yu is the only one to point out the
seemingdiscrepancy,whichhethusgoesontoexplain: "Inthechapteron
TacticalDispositionsitissaid,’OnemayKNOWhowtoconquerwithout
being able to DO it,’ whereas here we have the statement that ’victory’
can be achieved.’ The explanation is, that in the former chapter, where
the offensive and defensive are under discussion, it is said that if the en-
emy is fully prepared, one cannot make certain of beating him. But the
present passage refers particularly to the soldiers of Yueh who, according
to Sun Tzu’s calculations, will be kept in ignorance of the time and place
of the impending struggle. That is why he says here that victory can be
achieved."]
22. Thoughtheenemybestrongerinnumbers,wemaypreventhimfromﬁght-
ing. Schemesoastodiscoverhisplansandthelikelihoodoftheirsuccess.
[AnalternativereadingofferedbyChiaLinis: "Knowbeforehandallplans
conducive to our success and to the enemy’s failure."
23. Rouse him, and learnthe principle of his activity or inactivity.
[Chang Yu tells us that by noting the joy or anger shown by the enemy on
being thus disturbed, we shall be able to conclude whether his policy is to
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 58
lie low or the reverse. He instances the action of Cho-ku Liang, who sent
thescornfulpresentofawoman’shead-dresstoSsu-maI,inordertogoad
him out of his Fabian tactics.]
Force him to reveal himself, so as to ﬁnd out his vulnerable spots. 24.
Carefully compare the opposing army with your own, so that you may
know where strength is superabundant and where it is deﬁcient.
[Cf. IV. ss. 6.]
25. In making tactical dispositions, the highest pitch you can attain is to con-
ceal them;
[The piquancy of the paradox evaporates in translation. Concealment is
perhaps not so much actual invisibility (see supra ss. 9) as "showing no
sign" of what you mean to do, of the plans that are formed in your brain.]
conceal your dispositions, and you will be safe from the prying of the
subtlest spies, from the machinations of the wisest brains.
[Tu Mu explains: "Though the enemy may have clever and capable of-
ﬁcers, they will not be ableto lay any plans against us."]
26. How victory may be produced for them out of the enemy’s own tactics–
that is what the multitude cannot comprehend.
27. All men can see the tactics whereby I conquer, but what none can see is
the strategy out of which victory is evolved.
[I.e.,everybodycanseesuperﬁciallyhowabattleiswon;whattheycannot
see is the long series of plans and combinations which has preceded the
battle.]
28. Do not repeat the tactics which have gained you one victory, but let your
methods be regulated by theinﬁnite variety of circumstances.
[AsWangHsisagelyremarks: "Thereisbutoneroot-principleunderlying
victory,butthetacticswhichleaduptoitareinﬁniteinnumber."Withthis
compareCol. Henderson: "Therulesofstrategyarefewandsimple. They
may be learned in a week. They may be taught by familiar illustrations or
a dozen diagrams. But such knowledge will no more teach a man to lead
an army like Napoleon than a knowledge of grammar will teach him to
write like Gibbon."]
29. Military tactics are like unto water; for water in its natural course runs
away from high places and hastens downwards.
30. Soinwar,thewayistoavoidwhatisstrongandtostrikeatwhatisweak.
[Like water, taking the lineof least resistance.]
CHAPTER 7. WEAK POINTS AND STRONG 59
31. Water shapes its course according to the nature of the ground over which
itﬂows;thesoldierworksouthisvictoryinrelationtothefoewhomheis
facing.
32. Therefore, just as water retains no constant shape, so in warfare there are
no constant conditions.
33. He who can modify his tactics in relation to his opponent and thereby
succeed in winning, may becalled a heaven- born captain.
34. The ﬁve elements (water, ﬁre, wood, metal, earth) are not always equally
predominant;
[That is, as Wang Hsi says: "they predominate alternately."]
the four seasons make wayfor each other in turn.
[Literally, "have no invariable seat."]
There are short days and long; the moon has its periods of waning and
waxing.
[Cf. V. ss. 6. The purport of the passage is simply to illustrate the want
of ﬁxity in war by the changes constantly taking place in Nature. The
comparison is not very happy, however, because the regularity of the phe-
nomena which Sun Tzu mentions is by no means paralleled in war.]
Chapter 8
MANEUVERING
1. Sun Tzu said: In war, the general receives his commands from the sover-
eign.
2. Having collected an army and concentrated his forces, he must blend and
harmonize the different elements thereof before pitching his camp.
["Chang Yu says: "the establishment of harmony and conﬁdence between
the higher and lower ranks before venturing into the ﬁeld;" and he quotes
a saying of Wu Tzu (chap. 1 ad init.): "Without harmony in the State, no
military expedition can be undertaken; without harmony in the army, no
battlearraycanbeformed."InanhistoricalromanceSunTzuisrepresen-
ted as saying to Wu Yuan: "As a general rule, those who are waging war
should get rid of all the domestic troubles before proceeding to attack the
external foe."]
3. After that, comes tactical maneuvering, than which there is nothing more
difﬁcult.
[IhavedepartedslightlyfromthetraditionalinterpretationofTs‘aoKung,
who says: "From the time of receiving the sovereign’s instructions until
ourencampmentoveragainsttheenemy,thetacticstobepursuedaremost
difﬁcult." It seems to me that the tactics or maneuvers can hardly be said
to begin until the army has sallied forth and encamped, and Ch‘ien Hao’s
note gives color to this view: "For levying, concentrating, harmonizing
and entrenching an army, there are plenty of old rules which will serve.
The real difﬁculty comes when we engage in tactical operations." Tu Yu
also observes that "the great difﬁculty is to be beforehand with the enemy
in seizing favorable position."]
The difﬁculty of tactical maneuvering consists in turning the devious into
the direct, and misfortuneinto gain.
60
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 61
[This sentence contains one of those highly condensed and somewhat en-
igmatical expressions of which Sun Tzu is so fond. This is how it is ex-
plained by Ts‘ao Kung: "Make it appear that you are a long way off, then
cover the distance rapidly and arrive on the scene before your opponent."
TuMusays: "Hoodwinktheenemy,sothathemayberemissandleisurely
while you are dashing along with utmost speed." Ho Shih gives a slightly
different turn: "Although you may have difﬁcult ground to traverse and
natural obstacles to encounter this is a drawback which can be turned into
actualadvantagebycelerityofmovement."Signalexamplesofthissaying
are afforded by the two famous passages across the Alps–that of Hanni-
bal,whichlaidItalyathismercy,andthatofNapoleontwothousandyears
later, which resulted in thegreat victory of Marengo.]
4. Thus, to take a long and circuitous route, after enticing the enemy out of
theway,andthoughstartingafterhim,tocontrivetoreachthegoalbefore
him, shows knowledge of the artiﬁce of DEVIATION.
[Tu Mu cites the famous march of Chao She in 270 B.C. to relieve the
town of O-yu, which was closely invested by a Ch‘in army. The King of
Chao ﬁrst consulted Lien P‘o on the advisability of attempting a relief,
but the latter thought the distance too great, and the intervening country
too rugged and difﬁcult. His Majesty then turned to Chao She, who fully
admitted the hazardous nature of the march, but ﬁnally said: "We shall be
liketworatsﬁghtinginawhole–andthepluckieronewillwin!"Soheleft
the capital with his army, but had only gone a distance of 30 LI when he
stopped and began throwing up entrenchments. For 28 days he continued
strengthening his fortiﬁcations, and took care that spies should carry the
intelligencetotheenemy. TheCh‘ingeneralwasoverjoyed,andattributed
his adversary’s tardiness to the fact that the beleaguered city was in the
Han State, and thus not actually part of Chao territory. But the spies had
no sooner departed than Chao She began a forced march lasting for two
daysandonenight,andarriveonthesceneofactionwithsuchastonishing
rapidity that he was able to occupy a commanding position on the "North
hill" before the enemy had got wind of his movements. A crushing defeat
followedfortheCh‘inforces,whowereobligedtoraisethesiegeofO-yu
in all haste and retreat across the border.]
5. Maneuvering with an army is advantageous; with an undisciplined multi-
tude, most dangerous.
[I adopt the reading of the T‘UNG TIEN, Cheng Yu-hsien and the T‘U
SHU, since they appear to apply the exact nuance required in order to
make sense. The commentators using the standard text take this line to
mean that maneuvers may be proﬁtable, or they may be dangerous: it all
depends on the ability of the general.]
6. Ifyousetafullyequippedarmyinmarchinordertosnatchanadvantage,
the chances are that you will be too late. On the other hand, to detach
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 62
a ﬂying column for the purpose involves the sacriﬁce of its baggage and
stores.
[Some of the Chinese text is unintelligible to the Chinese commentators,
who paraphrase the sentence. I submit my own rendering without much
enthusiasm, being convinced that there is some deep-seated corruption in
the text. On the whole, it is clear that Sun Tzu does not approve of a
lengthy march being undertaken without supplies. Cf. infra, ss. 11.]
7. Thus, if you order your men to roll up their buff-coats, and make forced
marches without halting day or night, covering double the usual distance
at a stretch,
[The ordinary day’s march, according to Tu Mu, was 30 LI; but on one
occasion, when pursuing Liu Pei, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is said to have covered the
incredible distance of 300_li_ within twenty-four hours.]
doing a hundred LI in order to wrest an advantage, the leaders of all your
three divisions will fallinto the hands of the enemy.
8. The stronger men will be in front, the jaded ones will fall behind, and on
this plan only one-tenth ofyour army will reach its destination.
[Themoralis,asTs‘aoKungandotherspointout: Don’tmarchahundred
LI to gain a tactical advantage, either with or without impedimenta. Man-
euversofthisdescriptionshouldbeconﬁnedtoshortdistances. Stonewall
Jackson said: "The hardships of forced marches are often more painful
than the dangers of battle." He did not often call upon his troops for ex-
traordinary exertions. It was only when he intended a surprise, or when a
rapid retreat was imperative, that he sacriﬁced everything for speed.1]
9. IfyoumarchﬁftyLIinordertooutmaneuvertheenemy,youwilllosethe
leader of your ﬁrst division, and only half your force will reach the goal.
[Literally, "the leader of the ﬁrst division will be TORN AWAY."]
10. If you march thirty LI with the same object, two-thirds of your army will
arrive.
[In the T‘UNG TIEN is added: "From this we may know the difﬁculty of
maneuvering."]
11. Wemaytakeitthenthatanarmywithoutitsbaggage-trainislost;without
provisions it is lost; without bases of supply it is lost.
[I think Sun Tzu meant "stores accumulated in depots." But Tu Yu says
"fodder and the like," Chang Yu says "Goods in general," and Wang Hsi
says "fuel, salt, foodstuffs, etc."]
1See Col. Henderson, op. cit. vol. I. p. 426.
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 63
12. We cannot enter into alliances until we are acquainted with the designs of
our neighbors.
13. Wearenotﬁttoleadanarmyonthemarchunlesswearefamiliarwiththe
face of the country–its mountains and forests, its pitfalls and precipices,
its marshes and swamps.
14. We shall be unable to turn natural advantage to account unless we make
use of local guides.
[ss. 12-14 are repeated in chap. XI. ss. 52.]
15. In war, practice dissimulation, and you will succeed.
[In the tactics of Turenne, deception of the enemy, especially as to the
numerical strength of histroops, took a very prominent position.2]
16. Whether to concentrate or to divide your troops, must be decided by cir-
cumstances.
17. Let your rapidity be that of the wind,
[The simile is doubly appropriate, because the wind is not only swift but,
as Mei Yao-ch‘en points out, "invisible and leaves no tracks."]
your compactness that of the forest.
[MengShihcomesnearertothemarkinhisnote: "Whenslowlymarching,
orderandranksmustbepreserved"–soastoguardagainstsurpriseattacks.
But natural forest do not grow in rows, whereas they do generally possess
the quality of density or compactness.]
18. In raiding and plundering be like ﬁre,
[Cf. SHIH CHING, IV. 3. iv. 6: "Fierce as a blazing ﬁre which no man
can check."]
is immovability like a mountain.
[That is, when holding a position from which the enemy is trying to dis-
lodge you, or perhaps, as Tu Yu says, when he is trying to entice you into
a trap.]
19. Letyourplansbedarkandimpenetrableasnight,andwhenyoumove,fall
like a thunderbolt.
[Tu Yu quotes a saying of T‘ai Kung which has passed into a proverb:
"You cannot shut your ears to the thunder or your eyes to the lighting–
so rapid are they." Likewise, an attack should be made so quickly that it
cannot be parried.]
2For a number of maxims on this head, see "Marshal Turenne" (Longmans, 1907), p. 29.
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 64
20. When you plunder a countryside, let the spoil be divided amongst your
men;
[Sun Tzu wishes to lessen the abuses of indiscriminate plundering by in-
sisting that all booty shall be thrown into a common stock, which may
afterwards be fairly divided amongst all.]
when you capture new territory, cut it up into allotments for the beneﬁt of
the soldiery.
[Ch‘en Hao says "quarter your soldiers on the land, and let them sow and
plant it." It is by acting on this principle, and harvesting the lands they
invaded, that the Chinese have succeeded in carrying out some of their
most memorable and triumphant expeditions, such as that of Pan Ch‘ao
who penetrated to the Caspian, and in more recent years, those of Fu-
k‘ang-an and Tso Tsung-t‘ang.]
21. Ponder and deliberatebefore you make a move.
[Chang Yu quotes Wei Liao Tzu as saying that we must not break camp
until we have gained the resisting power of the enemy and the cleverness
of the opposing general. Cf. the "seven comparisons" in I. ss. 13.]
22. Hewillconquerwhohaslearnttheartiﬁceofdeviation. [Seesupra,SS.3,
4.]
Such is the art of maneuvering.
[With these words, the chapter would naturally come to an end. But there
now follows a long appendix in the shape of an extract from an earlier
book on War, now lost, but apparently extant at the time when Sun Tzu
wrote. The style of this fragment is not noticeable different from that of
SunTzuhimself,butnocommentatorraisesadoubtastoitsgenuineness.]
23. The Book of Army Management says:
[Itisperhapssigniﬁcantthatnoneoftheearliercommentatorsgiveusany
information about this work. Mei Yao- Ch‘en calls it "an ancient military
classic," and Wang Hsi, "an old book on war." Considering the enormous
amount of ﬁghting that had gone on for centuries before Sun Tzu’s time
betweenthevariouskingdomsandprincipalitiesofChina,itisnotinitself
improbable that a collection of military maxims should have been made
and written down at some earlier period.]
On the ﬁeld of battle,
[Implied, though not actually in the Chinese.]
the spoken word does not carry far enough: hence the institution of gongs
and drums. Nor can ordinary objects be seen clearly enough: hence the
institution of banners andﬂags.
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 65
24. Gongsanddrums,bannersandﬂags,aremeanswherebytheearsandeyes
of the host may be focusedon one particular point.
[Chang Yu says: "If sight and hearing converge simultaneously on the
same object, the evolutions of as many as a million soldiers will be like
those of a single man."!]
25. The host thus forming a single united body, is it impossible either for the
brave to advance alone, or forthe cowardly to retreat alone.
[ChuangYuquotesasaying: "Equallyguiltyarethosewhoadvanceagainst
orders and those who retreat against orders." Tu Mu tells a story in this
connection of Wu Ch‘i, when he was ﬁghting against the Ch‘in State. Be-
fore the battle had begun, one of his soldiers, a man of matchless daring,
salliedforthbyhimself,capturedtwoheadsfromtheenemy,andreturned
to camp. Wu Ch‘i had the man instantly executed, whereupon an ofﬁcer
ventured to remonstrate, saying: "This man was a good soldier, and ought
not to have been beheaded." Wu Ch‘i replied: "I fully believe he was a
good soldier, but I had him beheaded because he acted without orders."]
This is the art of handlinglarge masses of men.
26. In night-ﬁghting, then, make much use of signal-ﬁres and drums, and in
ﬁghting by day, of ﬂags and banners, as a means of inﬂuencing the ears
and eyes of your army.
[Ch‘en Hao alludes to Li Kuang-pi’s night ride to Ho-yang at the head of
500 mounted men; they made such an imposing display with torches, that
thoughtherebelleaderShihSsu-minghadalargearmy,hedidnotdareto
dispute their passage.]
27. A whole army may berobbed of its spirit;
["In war," says Chang Yu, "if a spirit of anger can be made to pervade all
ranks of an army at one and the same time, its onset will be irresistible.
Now the spirit of the enemy’s soldiers will be keenest when they have
newly arrived on the scene, and it is therefore our cue not to ﬁght at once,
buttowaituntiltheirardorandenthusiasmhavewornoff,andthenstrike.
It is in this way that they may be robbed of their keen spirit." Li Ch‘uan
and others tell an anecdote (to be found in the TSO CHUAN, year 10,
ss. 1) of Ts‘ao Kuei, a protege of Duke Chuang of Lu. The latter State
wasattackedbyCh‘i,andthedukewasabouttojoinbattleatCh‘ang-cho,
after the ﬁrst roll of the enemy’s drums, when Ts‘ao said: "Not just yet."
Only after their drums had beaten for the third time, did he give the word
for attack. Then they fought, and the men of Ch‘i were utterly defeated.
Questioned afterwards by the Duke as to the meaning of his delay, Ts‘ao
Kuei replied: "In battle, a courageous spirit is everything. Now the ﬁrst
rollofthedrumtendstocreatethisspirit,butwiththeseconditisalready
onthewane,andafterthethirditisgonealtogether. Iattackedwhentheir
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 66
spirit was gone and ours was at its height. Hence our victory." Wu Tzu
(chap. 4) puts "spirit" ﬁrst among the "four important inﬂuences" in war,
and continues: "The value of a whole army–a mighty host of a million
men–is dependent on one man alone: such is the inﬂuence of spirit!"]
a commander-in-chief maybe robbed of his presence of mind.
[Chang Yu says: "Presence of mind is the general’s most important asset.
It is the quality which enables him to discipline disorder and to inspire
courage into the panic- stricken." The great general Li Ching (A.D. 571-
649)hasasaying: "Attackingdoesnotmerelyconsistinassaultingwalled
cities or striking at an army in battle array; it must include the art of as-
sailing the enemy’s mental equilibrium."]
28. Now a soldier’s spirit is keenest in the morning;
[Always provided, I suppose, that he has had breakfast. At the battle of
the Trebia, the Romans were foolishly allowed to ﬁght fasting, whereas
Hannibal’s men had breakfasted at their leisure. See Livy, XXI, liv. 8, lv.
1 and 8.]
by noonday it has begun to ﬂag; and in the evening, his mind is bent only
on returning to camp.
29. A clever general, therefore, avoids an army when its spirit is keen, but
attacks it when it is sluggish and inclined to return. This is the art of
studying moods.
30. Disciplined and calm, to await the appearance of disorder and hubbub
amongst the enemy:–thisis the art of retaining self-possession.
31. To be near the goal while the enemy is still far from it, to wait at ease
while the enemy is toiling and struggling, to be well-fed while the enemy
is famished:–this is theart of husbanding one’s strength.
32. Torefrainfrominterceptinganenemywhosebannersareinperfectorder,
to refrain from attacking an army drawn up in calm and conﬁdent array:–
this is the art of studyingcircumstances.
33. It is a military axiom not to advance uphill against the enemy, nor to op-
pose him when he comes downhill.
34. Donotpursueanenemywhosimulatesﬂight;donotattacksoldierswhose
temper is keen.
35. Do not swallow bait offered by the enemy.
[LiCh‘uanandTuMu,withextraordinaryinabilitytoseeametaphor,take
these words quite literally of food and drink that have been poisoned by
the enemy. Ch‘en Hao and Chang Yu carefully point out that the saying
has a wider application.]
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 67
Do not interfere with an army that is returning home.
[The commentators explain this rather singular piece of advice by saying
that a man whose heart is set on returning home will ﬁght to the death
against any attempt to bar his way, and is therefore too dangerous an op-
ponenttobetackled. ChangYuquotesthewordsofHanHsin: "Invincible
isthesoldierwhohathhisdesireandreturnethhomewards."Amarvelous
tale is told of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s courage and resource in ch. 1 of the SAN
KUO CHI: In 198 A.D., he was besieging Chang Hsiu in Jang, when Liu
Piao sent reinforcements with a view to cutting off Ts‘ao’s retreat. The
latter was obliged to draw off his troops, only to ﬁnd himself hemmed in
between two enemies, who were guarding each outlet of a narrow pass in
which he had engaged himself. In this desperate plight Ts‘ao waited until
nightfall, when he bored a tunnel into the mountain side and laid an am-
bushinit. Assoonasthewholearmyhadpassedby,thehiddentroopsfell
on his rear, while Ts‘ao himself turned and met his pursuers in front, so
thattheywerethrownintoconfusionandannihilated. Ts‘aoTs‘aosaidaf-
terwards: "The brigands tried to check my army in its retreat and brought
metobattleinadesperateposition: henceIknewhowtoovercomethem."]
36. When you surround an army, leave an outlet free.
[Thisdoesnotmeanthattheenemyistobeallowedtoescape. Theobject,
as Tu Mu puts it, is "to make him believe that there is a road to safety,
and thus prevent his ﬁghting with the courage of despair." Tu Mu adds
pleasantly: "After that, you may crush him."]
Do not press a desperate foe too hard.
[Ch‘en Hao quotes the saying: "Birds and beasts when brought to bay
will use their claws and teeth." Chang Yu says: "If your adversary has
burned his boats and destroyed his cooking-pots, and is ready to stake all
on the issue of a battle, he must not be pushed to extremities." Ho Shih
illustrates the meaning by a story taken from the life of Yen-ch‘ing. That
general, together with his colleague Tu Chung-wei was surrounded by a
vastly superior army of Khitans in the year 945 A.D. The country was
bare and desert-like, and the little Chinese force was soon in dire straits
forwantofwater. Thewellstheyboredrandry,andthemenwerereduced
to squeezing lumps of mud and sucking out the moisture. Their ranks
thinned rapidly, until at last Fu Yen-ch‘ing exclaimed: "We are desperate
men. Far better to die for our country than to go with fettered hands into
captivity!" A strong gale happened to be blowing from the northeast and
darkening the air with dense clouds of sandy dust. To Chung-wei was
for waiting until this had abated before deciding on a ﬁnal attack; but
luckily another ofﬁcer, Li Shou- cheng by name, was quicker to see an
opportunity, and said: "They are many and we are few, but in the midst of
this sandstorm our numbers will not be discernible; victory will go to the
CHAPTER 8. MANEUVERING 68
strenuousﬁghter,andthewindwillbeourbestally."Accordingly,FuYen-
ch‘ing made a sudden and wholly unexpected onslaught with his cavalry,
routed the barbarians and succeeded in breaking through to safety.]
37. Such is the art of warfare.
Chapter 9
VARIATION IN TACTICS
[The heading means literally "The Nine Variations," but as Sun Tzu does not appear
to enumerate these, and as, indeed, he has already told us (V SS. 6-11) that such de-
ﬂections from the ordinary course are practically innumerable, we have little option
but to follow Wang Hsi, who says that "Nine" stands for an indeﬁnitely large number.
"All it means is that in warfare we ought to very our tactics to the utmost degree.... I
do not know what Ts‘ao Kung makes these Nine Variations out to be, but it has been
suggested that they are connected with the Nine Situations" - of chapt. XI. This is the
view adopted by Chang Yu. The only other alternative is to suppose that something
has been lost–a supposition to which the unusual shortness of the chapter lends some
weight.]
1. Sun Tzu said: In war, the general receives his commands from the sover-
eign, collects his army and concentrates his forces.
[Repeated from VII. ss. 1, where it is certainly more in place. It may
have been interpolated here merely in order to supply a beginning to the
chapter.]
2. When in difﬁcult country, do not encamp. In country where high roads
intersect,joinhandswithyourallies. Donotlingerindangerouslyisolated
positions.
[The last situation is not one of the Nine Situations as given in the begin-
ning of chap. XI, but occurs later on (ibid. ss. 43. q.v.). Chang Yu deﬁnes
this situation as being situated across the frontier, in hostile territory. Li
Ch‘uan says it is "country in which there are no springs or wells, ﬂocks
or herds, vegetables or ﬁrewood;" Chia Lin, "one of gorges, chasms and
precipices, without a roadby which to advance."]
In hemmed-in situations, you must resort to stratagem. In desperate posi-
tion, you must ﬁght.
3. There are roads whichmust not be followed,
69
CHAPTER 9. VARIATION IN TACTICS 70
["Especiallythoseleadingthroughnarrowdeﬁles,"saysLiCh‘uan,"where
an ambush is to be feared."]
armies which must be notattacked,
[More correctly, perhaps, "there are times when an army must not be at-
tacked." Ch‘en Hao says: "When you see your way to obtain a rival ad-
vantage, but are powerless to inﬂict a real defeat, refrain from attacking,
for fear of overtaxing your men’s strength."]
towns which must not be besieged,
[Cf. III.ss. 4Ts‘aoKunggivesaninterestingillustrationfromhisownex-
perience. When invading the territory of Hsu-chou, he ignored the city of
Hua-pi, which lay directly in his path, and pressed on into the heart of the
country. Thisexcellentstrategywasrewardedbythesubsequentcaptureof
nofewerthanfourteenimportantdistrictcities. ChangYusays: "Notown
should be attacked which, if taken, cannot be held, or if left alone, will
not cause any trouble." Hsun Ying, when urged to attack Pi-yang, replied:
"The city is small and well-fortiﬁed; even if I succeed intaking it, it will
be no great feat of arms; whereas if I fail, I shall make myself a laughing-
stock."Intheseventeenthcentury,siegesstillformedalargeproportionof
war. It was Turenne who directed attention to the importance of marches,
countermarches and maneuvers. He said: "It is a great mistake to waste
men in taking a town when the same expenditure of soldiers will gain a
province."1]
positions which must not be contested, commands of the sovereign which
must not be obeyed.
[This is a hard saying for the Chinese, with their reverence for authority,
and Wei Liao Tzu (quoted by Tu Mu) is moved to exclaim: "Weapons are
baleful instruments, strife is antagonistic to virtue, a military commander
isthenegationofcivilorder!"Theunpalatablefactremains,however,that
even Imperial wishes must be subordinated to military necessity.]
4. The general who thoroughly understands the advantages that accompany
variation of tactics knowshow to handle his troops.
5. The general who does not understand these, may be well acquainted with
the conﬁguration of the country, yet he will not be able to turn his know-
ledge to practical account.
[Literally, "get the advantage of the ground," which means not only se-
curing good positions, but availing oneself of natural advantages in every
possible way. Chang Yu says: "Every kind of ground is characterized by
certain natural features, and also gives scope for a certain variability of
1"Marshal Turenne," p. 50.
CHAPTER 9. VARIATION IN TACTICS 71
plan. How it is possible to turn these natural features to account unless
topographical knowledge issupplemented by versatility of mind?"]
6. So, the student of war who is unversed in the art of war of varying his
plans,eventhoughhebeacquaintedwiththeFiveAdvantages,willfailto
make the best use of his men.
[ChiaLintellsusthattheseimplyﬁveobviousandgenerallyadvantageous
lines of action, namely: "if a certain road is short, it must be followed; if
anarmyisisolated,itmustbeattacked;ifatownisinaparlouscondition,
it must be besieged; if a position can be stormed, it must be attempted;
and if consistent with military operations, the ruler’s commands must be
obeyed." But there are circumstances which sometimes forbid a general
to use these advantages. For instance, "a certain road may be the shortest
way for him, but if he knows that it abounds in natural obstacles, or that
theenemyhaslaidanambushonit,hewillnotfollowthatroad. Ahostile
force may be open to attack, but if he knows that it is hard-pressed and
likely to ﬁght with desperation, he will refrain from striking," and so on.]
7. Hence in the wise leader’s plans, considerations of advantage and of dis-
advantage will be blendedtogether.
["Whether in an advantageous position or a disadvantageous one," says
Ts‘ao Kung, "the opposite state should be always present to your mind."]
8. If our expectation of advantage be tempered in this way, we may succeed
in accomplishing the essential part of our schemes.
[TuMusays: "Ifwewishtowrestanadvantagefromtheenemy,wemust
not ﬁx our minds on that alone, but allow for the possibility of the enemy
also doing some harm to us, and let this enter as a factor into our calcula-
tions."]
9. If, on the other hand, in the midst of difﬁculties we are always ready to
seize an advantage, we may extricate ourselves from misfortune.
[Tu Mu says: "If I wish to extricate myself from a dangerous position, I
must consider not only the enemy’s ability to injure me, but also my own
ability to gain an advantage over the enemy. If in my counsels these two
considerationsareproperlyblended,Ishallsucceedinliberatingmyself....
For instance; if I am surrounded by the enemy and only think of effecting
an escape, the nervelessness of my policy will incite my adversary to pur-
sue and crush me; it would be far better to encourage my men to deliver a
boldcounter-attack,andusetheadvantagethusgainedtofreemyselffrom
the enemy’s toils." See the story of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, VII. ss. 35, note.]
10. Reduce the hostile chiefs by inﬂicting damage on them;
CHAPTER 9. VARIATION IN TACTICS 72
[ChiaLinenumeratesseveralwaysofinﬂictingthisinjury,someofwhich
wouldonlyoccurtotheOrientalmind:–"Enticeawaytheenemy’sbestand
wisest men, so that he may be left without counselors. Introduce traitors
into his country, that the government policy may be rendered futile. Fo-
ment intrigue and deceit, and thus sow dissension between the ruler and
his ministers. By means of every artful contrivance, cause deterioration
amongst his men and waste of his treasure. Corrupt his morals by in-
sidious gifts leading him into excess. Disturb and unsettle his mind by
presenting him with lovely women." Chang Yu (after Wang Hsi) makes a
different interpretation of Sun Tzu here: "Get the enemy into a position
where he must suffer injury, and he will submit of his own accord."]
and make trouble for them,
[TuMu,inthisphrase,inhisinterpretationindicatesthattroubleshouldbe
makefortheenemyaffectingtheir"possessions,"or,aswemightsay,"as-
sets," which he considers to be "a large army, a rich exchequer, harmony
amongst the soldiers, punctual fulﬁllment of commands." These give us a
whip-hand over the enemy.]
and keep them constantly engaged;
[Literally, "make servants of them." Tu Yu says "prevent the from having
any rest."]
hold out specious allurements, and make them rush to any given point.
[Meng Shih’s note contains an excellent example of the idiomatic use of:
"causethemtoforgetPIEN(thereasonsforactingotherwisethanontheir
ﬁrst impulse), and hastenin our direction."]
11. The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy’s not
coming, but on our own readiness to receive him; not on the chance of
his not attacking, but rather on the fact that we have made our position
unassailable.
12. There are ﬁve dangerous faults which may affect a general:
(1) Recklessness, which leads to destruction;
["Bravery without forethought," as Ts‘ao Kung analyzes it, which causes
a man to ﬁght blindly and desperately like a mad bull. Such an oppon-
ent, says Chang Yu, "must not be encountered with brute force, but may
be lured into an ambush and slain." Cf. Wu Tzu, chap. IV. ad init.: "In
estimating the character of a general, men are wont to pay exclusive at-
tention to his courage, forgetting that courage is only one out of many
qualities which a general should possess. The merely brave man is prone
toﬁghtrecklessly;andhewhoﬁghtsrecklessly,withoutanyperceptionof
whatisexpedient,mustbecondemned."Ssu-maFa,too,maketheincisive
remark: "Simply going toone’s death does not bring about victory."]
CHAPTER 9. VARIATION IN TACTICS 73
(2) cowardice, which leadsto capture;
[Ts‘ao Kung deﬁnes the Chinese word translated here as "cowardice" as
being of the man "whom timidity prevents from advancing to seize an ad-
vantage," and Wang Hsiadds "who isquick to ﬂeeat the sightof danger."
MengShihgivesthecloserparaphrase"hewhoisbentonreturningalive,"
this is, the man who will never take a risk. But, as Sun Tzu knew, nothing
is to be achieved in war unless you are willing to take risks. T‘ai Kung
said: "Hewholetsanadvantageslipwillsubsequentlybringuponhimself
real disaster." In 404 A.D., Liu Yu pursued the rebel Huan Hsuan up the
Yangtsze and fought a naval battle with him at the island of Ch‘eng-hung.
The loyal troops numbered only a few thousands, while their opponents
were in great force. But Huan Hsuan, fearing the fate which was in store
for him should be be overcome, had a light boat made fast to the side of
his war-junk, so that he might escape, if necessary, at a moment’s notice.
The natural result was that the ﬁghting spirit of his soldiers was utterly
quenched,andwhentheloyalistsmadeanattackfromwindwardwithﬁre-
ships,allstrivingwiththeutmostardortobeﬁrstinthefray,HuanHsuan’s
forceswererouted,hadtoburnalltheirbaggageandﬂedfortwodaysand
nightswithoutstopping. ChangYutellsasomewhatsimilarstoryofChao
Ying-ch‘i,ageneraloftheChinStatewhoduringabattlewiththearmyof
Ch‘uin597B.C.hadaboatkeptinreadinessforhimontheriver,wishing
in case of defeat to be theﬁrst to get across.]
(3) a hasty temper, which can be provoked by insults;
[TuMutellsusthatYaoHsing,whenopposedin357A.D.byHuangMei,
Teng Ch‘iang and others shut himself up behind his walls and refused to
ﬁght. TengCh‘iangsaid: "Ouradversaryisofacholerictemperandeasily
provoked; let us make constant sallies and break down his walls, then he
will grow angry and come out. Once we can bring his force to battle, it is
doomed to be our prey." This plan was acted upon, Yao Hsiang came out
toﬁght,wasluredasfarasSan-yuanbytheenemy’spretendedﬂight,and
ﬁnally attacked and slain.]
(4) a delicacy of honor whichis sensitive to shame;
[This need not be taken to mean that a sense of honor is really a defect in
a general. What Sun Tzu condemns is rather an exaggerated sensitiveness
to slanderous reports, the thin-skinned man who is stung by opprobrium,
however undeserved. Mei Yao- ch‘en truly observes, though somewhat
paradoxically: "The seek after glory should be careless of public opin-
ion."]
(5) over-solicitude for his men, which exposes him to worry and trouble.
[Here again, Sun Tzu does not mean that the general is to be careless of
thewelfareofhistroops. Allhewishestoemphasizeisthedangerofsac-
riﬁcing any important military advantage to the immediate comfort of his
CHAPTER 9. VARIATION IN TACTICS 74
men. This is a shortsighted policy, because in the long run the troops will
suffermorefromthedefeat,or,atbest,theprolongationofthewar,which
will be the consequence. A mistaken feeling of pity will often induce a
generaltorelieveabeleagueredcity,ortoreinforceahard-presseddetach-
ment, contrary to his military instincts. It is now generally admitted that
our repeated efforts to relieve Ladysmith in the South African War were
so many strategical blunders which defeated their own purpose. And in
theend,reliefcamethroughtheverymanwhostartedoutwiththedistinct
resolve no longer to subordinate the interests of the whole to sentiment
in favor of a part. An old soldier of one of our generals who failed most
conspicuouslyinthiswar,triedonce,Iremember,todefendhimtomeon
the ground that he was always "so good to his men." By this plea, had he
but known it, he was only condemning him out of Sun Tzu’s mouth.]
13. These are the ﬁve besetting sins of a general, ruinous to the conduct of
war.
14. When an army is overthrown and its leader slain, the cause will surely
be found among these ﬁve dangerous faults. Let them be a subject of
meditation.
Chapter 10
THE ARMY ON THE MARCH
[The contents of this interesting chapter are better indicated in ss. 1 than by this head-
ing.]
1. Sun Tzu said: We come now to the question of encamping the army, and
observing signs of the enemy. Pass quickly over mountains, and keep in
the neighborhood of valleys.
[The idea is, not to linger among barren uplands, but to keep close to sup-
plies of water and grass. Cf. Wu Tzu, ch. 3: "Abide not in natural ovens,"
i.e. "theopeningsofvalleys."ChangYutellsthefollowinganecdote: Wu-
tuCh‘iangwasarobbercaptaininthetimeoftheLaterHan,andMaYuan
was sent to exterminate his gang. Ch‘iang having found a refuge in the
hills, Ma Yuan made no attempt to force a battle, but seized all the fa-
vorable positions commanding supplies of water and forage. Ch‘iang was
soon in such a desperate plight for want of provisions that he was forced
tomakeatotalsurrender. Hedidnotknowtheadvantageofkeepinginthe
neighborhood of valleys."]
2. Camp in high places,
[Notonhighhills,butonknollsorhillockselevatedabovethesurrounding
country.]
facing the sun.
[Tu Mu takes this to mean "facing south," and Ch‘en Hao "facing east."
Cf. infra, SS. 11, 13.
Do not climb heights in order to ﬁght. So much for mountain warfare.
3. After crossing a river,you should get far away from it.
["Inordertotempttheenemytocrossafteryou,"accordingtoTs‘aoKung,
and also, says Chang Yu, "in order not to be impeded in your evolutions."
75
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 76
The T‘UNG TIEN reads, "If THE ENEMY crosses a river," etc. But in
view of the next sentence, this is almost certainly an interpolation.]
4. Whenaninvadingforcecrossesariverinitsonwardmarch,donotadvance
tomeetitinmid-stream. Itwillbebesttolethalfthearmygetacross,and
then deliver your attack.
[Li Ch‘uan alludes to the great victory won by Han Hsin over Lung Chu
at the Wei River. Turning to the CH‘IEN HAN SHU, ch. 34, fol. 6 verso,
we ﬁnd the battle described as follows: "The two armies were drawn up
on opposite sides of the river. In the night, Han Hsin ordered his men to
take some ten thousand sacks ﬁlled with sand and construct a dam higher
up. Then, leading half his army across, he attacked Lung Chu; but after a
time, pretending to have failed in his attempt, he hastily withdrew to the
other bank. Lung Chu was much elated by this unlooked-for success, and
exclaiming: "I felt sure that Han Hsin was really a coward!" he pursued
him and began crossing the river in his turn. Han Hsin now sent a party
to cut open the sandbags, thus releasing a great volume of water, which
swept down and prevented the greater portion of Lung Chu’s army from
getting across. He then turned upon the force which had been cut off, and
annihilated it, Lung Chu himself being amongst the slain. The rest of the
army, on the further bank, also scattered and ﬂed in all directions.]
5. If you are anxious to ﬁght, you should not go to meet the invader near a
river which he has to cross.
[For fear of preventing his crossing.]
6. Moor your craft higherup than the enemy, and facing the sun.
[See supra, ss. 2. The repetition of these words in connection with water
isveryawkward. ChangYuhasthenote: "Saideitheroftroopsmarshaled
on the river-bank, or of boats anchored in the stream itself; in either case
it is essential to be higher than the enemy and facing the sun." The other
commentators are not at all explicit.]
Do not move up-stream to meet the enemy.
[Tu Mu says: "As water ﬂows downwards, we must not pitch our camp
on the lower reaches of a river, for fear the enemy should open the sluices
andsweepusawayinaﬂood. Chu-koWu-houhasremarkedthat’inriver
warfare we must not advance against the stream,’ which is as much as to
say that our ﬂeet must not be anchored below that of the enemy, for then
they would be able to take advantage of the current and make short work
of us." There is also the danger, noted by other commentators, that the
enemy may throw poison onthe water to be carried down to us.]
So much for river warfare.
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 77
7. In crossing salt-marshes, your sole concern should be to get over them
quickly, without any delay.
[Because of the lack of fresh water, the poor quality of the herbage, and
last but not least, becausethey are low, ﬂat, and exposed to attack.]
8. If forced to ﬁght in a salt-marsh, you should have water and grass near
you, and get your back to a clump of trees.
[Li Ch‘uan remarks that the ground is less likely to be treacherous where
there are trees, while Tu Mu says that they will serve to protect the rear.]
So much for operations in salt-marches.
9. In dry, level country, take up an easily accessible position with rising
ground to your right and on your rear,
[Tu Mu quotes T‘ai Kung as saying: "An army should have a stream or a
marsh on its left, and a hill or tumulus on its right."]
so that the danger may be in front, and safety lie behind. So much for
campaigning in ﬂat country.
10. These are the four useful branches of military knowledge
[Those,namely,concernedwith(1)mountains,(2)rivers,(3)marshes,and
(4) plains. Compare Napoleon’s "Military Maxims," no. 1.]
which enabled the Yellow Emperor to vanquish four several sovereigns.
[Regarding the "Yellow Emperor": Mei Yao-ch‘en asks, with some plaus-
ibility, whether there is an error in the text as nothing is known of Huang
Ti having conquered four other Emperors. The SHIH CHI (ch. 1 ad init.)
speaks only of his victories over Yen Ti and Ch‘ih Yu. In the LIU T‘AO
it is mentioned that he "fought seventy battles and paciﬁed the Empire."
Ts‘ao Kung’s explanation is, that the Yellow Emperor was the ﬁrst to in-
stitute the feudal system of vassals princes, each of whom (to the number
offour)originallyborethetitleofEmperor. LiCh‘uantellsusthattheart
ofwaroriginatedunderHuangTi,whoreceiveditfromhisMinisterFeng
Hou.]
11. All armies prefer high ground to low.
["High Ground," says Mei Yao-ch‘en, "is not only more agreement and
salubrious,butmoreconvenientfromamilitarypointofview;lowground
is not only damp and unhealthy, but also disadvantageous for ﬁghting."]
and sunny places to dark.
12. If you are careful of your men,
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 78
[Ts‘ao Kung says: "Make for fresh water and pasture, where you can turn
out your animals to graze."]
and camp on hard ground, the army will be free from disease of every
kind,
[Chang Yu says: "The dryness of the climate will prevent the outbreak of
illness."]
and this will spell victory.
13. When you come to a hill or a bank, occupy the sunny side, with the slope
onyourrightrear. Thusyouwillatonceactforthebeneﬁtofyoursoldiers
and utilize the natural advantages of the ground.
14. When, in consequence of heavy rains up-country, a river which you wish
to ford is swollen and ﬂecked with foam, you must wait until it subsides.
15. Countryinwhichthereareprecipitouscliffswithtorrentsrunningbetween,
deep natural hollows,
[The latter deﬁned as "places enclosed on every side by steep banks, with
pools of water at the bottom.]
conﬁned places,
[Deﬁned as "natural pens or prisons" or "places surrounded by precipices
on three sides–easy to getinto, but hard to get out of."]
tangled thickets,
[Deﬁnedas"placescoveredwithsuchdenseundergrowththatspearscan-
not be used."]
quagmires
[Deﬁned as "low-lying places, so heavy with mud as to be impassable for
chariots and horsemen."]
and crevasses,
[Deﬁned by Mei Yao-ch‘en as "a narrow difﬁcult way between beetling
cliffs." Tu Mu’s note is "ground covered with trees and rocks, and inter-
sectedbynumerousravinesandpitfalls."Thisisveryvague,butChiaLin
explains it clearly enough as a deﬁle or narrow pass, and Chang Yu takes
much the same view. On the whole, the weight of the commentators cer-
tainly inclines to the rendering "deﬁle." But the ordinary meaning of the
Chinese in one place is "a crack or ﬁssure" and the fact that the meaning
oftheChineseelsewhereinthesentenceindicatessomethinginthenature
of a deﬁle, make me think that Sun Tzu is here speaking of crevasses.]
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 79
should be left with all possible speed and not approached.
16. While we keep away from such places, we should get the enemy to ap-
proach them; while we face them, we should let the enemy have them on
his rear.
17. If in the neighborhood of your camp there should be any hilly country,
ponds surrounded by aquatic grass, hollow basins ﬁlled with reeds, or
woods with thick undergrowth, they must be carefully routed out and
searched; for these are places where men in ambush or insidious spies
are likely to be lurking.
[Chang Yu has the note: "We must also be on our guard against traitors
whomaylieinclosecovert,secretlyspyingoutourweaknessesandover-
hearing our instructions."]
18. When the enemy is close at hand and remains quiet, he is relying on the
natural strength of his position.
[Here begin Sun Tzu’s remarks on the reading of signs, much of which
is so good that it could almost be included in a modern manual like Gen.
Baden-Powell’s "Aids to Scouting."]
19. When he keeps aloof and tries to provoke a battle, he is anxious for the
other side to advance.
[Probably because we are in a strong position from which he wishes to
dislodge us. "If he came close up to us, says Tu Mu, "and tried to force a
battle,hewouldseemtodespiseus,andtherewouldbelessprobabilityof
our responding to the challenge."]
20. If his place of encampment is easy of access, he is tendering a bait.
21. Movement amongst the trees of a forest shows that the enemy is advan-
cing.
[Ts‘ao Kung explains this as "felling trees to clear a passage," and Chang
Yusays: "Everymansendsoutscoutstoclimbhighplacesandobservethe
enemy. Ifascoutseesthatthetreesofaforestaremovingandshaking,he
may know that they are being cut down to clear a passage for the enemy’s
march."]
The appearance of a number of screens in the midst of thick grass means
that the enemy wants to make us suspicious.
[Tu Yu’s explanation, borrowed from Ts‘ao Kung’s, is as follows: "The
presence of a number of screens or sheds in the midst of thick vegetation
is a sure sign that the enemy has ﬂed and, fearing pursuit, has constructed
thesehiding-placesinordertomakeussuspectanambush."Itappearsthat
these "screens" were hastily knotted together out of any long grass which
the retreating enemy happened to come across.]
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 80
22. The rising of birds intheir ﬂight is the sign of an ambuscade.
[Chang Yu’s explanation is doubtless right: "When birds that are ﬂying
along in a straight line suddenly shoot upwards, it means that soldiers are
in ambush at the spot beneath."]
Startled beasts indicatethat a sudden attack is coming.
23. When there is dust rising in a high column, it is the sign of chariots ad-
vancing;whenthedustislow,butspreadoverawidearea,itbetokensthe
approach of infantry.
["High and sharp," or rising to a peak, is of course somewhat exaggerated
as applied to dust. The commentators explain the phenomenon by saying
thathorsesandchariots,beingheavierthanmen,raisemoredust,andalso
follow one another in the same wheel-track, whereas foot-soldiers would
bemarchinginranks,manyabreast. AccordingtoChangYu,"everyarmy
onthemarchmusthavescoutssomewayinadvance,whoonsightingdust
raised by the enemy, will gallop back and report it to the commander-in-
chief." Cf. Gen. Baden-Powell: "As you move along, say, in a hostile
country, your eyes should be looking afar for the enemy or any signs of
him: ﬁgures, dust rising, birds getting up, glitter of arms, etc."1]
Whenitbranchesoutindifferentdirections,itshowsthatpartieshavebeen
sent to collect ﬁrewood. A few clouds of dust moving to and fro signify
that the army is encamping.
[Chang Yu says: "In apportioning the defenses for a cantonment, light
horse will be sent out to survey the position and ascertain the weak and
strongpointsallalongitscircumference. Hencethesmallquantityofdust
and its motion."]
24. Humblewordsandincreasedpreparationsaresignsthattheenemyisabout
to advance.
["As though they stood in great fear of us," says Tu Mu. "Their object is
to make us contemptuous and careless, after which they will attack us."
ChangYualludestothestoryofT‘ienTanoftheCh‘i-moagainsttheYen
forces, led by Ch‘i Chieh. In ch. 82 of the SHIH CHI we read: "T‘ien
Tan openly said: ’My only fear is that the Yen army may cut off the noses
of their Ch‘i prisoners and place them in the front rank to ﬁght against us;
that would be the undoing of our city.’ The other side being informed of
thisspeech,atonceactedonthesuggestion;butthosewithinthecitywere
enragedatseeingtheirfellow-countrymenthusmutilated,andfearingonly
lest they should fall into the enemy’s hands, were nerved to defend them-
selvesmoreobstinatelythanever. OnceagainT‘ienTansentbackconver-
ted spies who reported these words to the enemy: "What I dread most is
1"Aids to Scouting," p. 26.
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 81
that the men of Yen may dig up the ancestral tombs outside the town, and
by inﬂicting this indignity on our forefathers cause us to become faint-
hearted.’ Forthwith the besiegers dug up all the graves and burned the
corpses lying in them. And the inhabitants of Chi-mo, witnessing the out-
ragefromthecity-walls,weptpassionatelyandwereallimpatienttogoout
and ﬁght, their fury being increased tenfold. T‘ien Tan knew then that his
soldiers were ready for any enterprise. But instead of a sword, he himself
too a mattock in his hands, and ordered others to be distributed amongst
his best warriors, while the ranks were ﬁlled up with their wives and con-
cubines. Hethenservedoutalltheremainingrationsandbadehismeneat
their ﬁll. The regular soldiers were told to keep out of sight, and the walls
were manned with the old and weaker men and with women. This done,
envoysweredispatchedtotheenemy’scamptoarrangetermsofsurrender,
whereupon the Yen army began shouting for joy. T‘ien Tan also collected
20,000 ounces of silver from the people, and got the wealthy citizens of
Chi-mo to send it to the Yen general with the prayer that, when the town
capitulated,hewouldallowtheirhomestobeplunderedortheirwomento
be maltreated. Ch‘i Chieh, in high good humor, granted their prayer; but
his army now became increasingly slack and careless. Meanwhile, T‘ien
Tan got together a thousand oxen, decked them with pieces of red silk,
painted their bodies, dragon-like, with colored stripes, and fastened sharp
blades on their horns and well-greased rushes on their tails. When night
came on, he lighted the ends of the rushes, and drove the oxen through a
numberofholeswhichhehadpiercedinthewalls,backingthemupwitha
force of 5000 picked warriors. The animals, maddened with pain, dashed
furiously into the enemy’s camp where they caused the utmost confusion
anddismay;fortheirtailsactedastorches,showingupthehideouspattern
on their bodies, and the weapons on their horns killed or wounded any
with whom they came into contact. In the meantime, the band of 5000
had crept up with gags in their mouths, and now threw themselves on the
enemy. Atthesamemomentafrightfuldinaroseinthecityitself,allthose
thatremainedbehindmakingasmuchnoiseaspossiblebybangingdrums
and hammering on bronze vessels, until heaven and earth were convulsed
bytheuproar. Terror-stricken,theYenarmyﬂedindisorder,hotlypursued
by the men of Ch‘i, who succeeded in slaying their general Ch‘i Chien....
The result of the battle was the ultimate recovery of some seventy cities
which had belonged to the Ch‘i State."]
Violent language and driving forward as if to the attack are signs that he
will retreat.
25. Whenthelightchariotscomeoutﬁrstandtakeupapositiononthewings,
it is a sign that the enemy is forming for battle.
26. Peace proposals unaccompanied by a sworn covenant indicate a plot.
[Thereadinghereisuncertain. LiCh‘uanindicates"atreatyconﬁrmedby
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 82
oaths and hostages." Wang Hsi and Chang Yu, on the other hand, simply
say "without reason," "on afrivolous pretext."]
27. When there is much running about
[Every man hastening to his proper place under his own regimental ban-
ner.]
andthesoldiersfallintorank,itmeansthatthecriticalmomenthascome.
28. When some are seen advancing and some retreating, it is a lure.
29. When the soldiers stand leaning on their spears, they are faint from want
of food.
30. Ifthosewhoaresenttodrawwaterbeginbydrinkingthemselves,thearmy
is suffering from thirst.
[As Tu Mu remarks: "One may know the condition of a whole army from
the behavior of a single man."]
31. Iftheenemyseesanadvantagetobegainedandmakesnoefforttosecure
it, the soldiers are exhausted.
32. If birds gather on any spot, it is unoccupied.
[A useful fact to bear in mind when, for instance, as Ch‘en Hao says, the
enemy has secretly abandoned his camp.]
Clamor by night betokens nervousness.
33. If there is disturbance in the camp, the general’s authority is weak. If the
banners and ﬂags are shifted about, sedition is afoot. If the ofﬁcers are
angry, it means that the men are weary.
[TuMuunderstandsthesentencedifferently: "Ifalltheofﬁcersofanarmy
are angry with their general, it means that they are broken with fatigue"
owing to the exertions whichhe has demanded from them.]
34. When an army feeds its horses with grain and kills its cattle for food,
[In the ordinary course of things, the men would be fed on grain and the
horses chieﬂy on grass.]
and when the men do not hang their cooking-pots over the camp- ﬁres,
showingthattheywillnotreturntotheirtents,youmayknowthattheyare
determined to ﬁght to the death.
[I may quote here the illustrative passage from the HOU HAN SHU, ch.
71, given in abbreviated form by the P‘EI WEN YUN FU: "The rebel
Wang Kuo of Liang was besieging the town of Ch‘en- ts‘ang, and Huang-
fu Sung, who was in supreme command, and Tung Cho were sent out
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 83
againsthim. Thelatterpressedforhastymeasures,butSungturnedadeaf
ear to his counsel. At last the rebels were utterly worn out, and began to
throw down their weapons of their own accord. Sung was not advancing
totheattack,butChosaid: ’Itisaprincipleofwarnottopursuedesperate
men and not to press a retreating host.’ Sung answered: ’That does not
apply here. What I am about to attack is a jaded army, not a retreating
host;withdisciplinedtroopsIamfallingonadisorganizedmultitude,nota
bandofdesperatemen.’ Thereuponheadvancestotheattackunsupported
by his colleague, and routedthe enemy, Wang Kuo being slain."]
35. The sight of men whispering together in small knots or speaking in sub-
dued tones points to disaffection amongst the rank and ﬁle.
36. Toofrequentrewardssignifythattheenemyisattheendofhisresources;
[Because, when an army is hard pressed, as Tu Mu says, there is always
a fear of mutiny, and lavish rewards are given to keep the men in good
temper.]
too many punishments betray a condition of dire distress.
[Because in such case discipline becomes relaxed, and unwonted severity
is necessary to keep the men to their duty.]
37. To begin by bluster, but afterwards to take fright at the enemy’s numbers,
shows a supreme lack of intelligence.
[I follow the interpretation of Ts‘ao Kung, also adopted by Li Ch‘uan, Tu
Mu, and Chang Yu. Another possible meaning set forth by Tu Yu, Chia
Lin, Mei Tao-ch‘en and Wang Hsi, is: "The general who is ﬁrst tyran-
nical towards his men, and then in terror lest they should mutiny, etc."
Thiswouldconnectthesentencewithwhatwentbeforeaboutrewardsand
punishments.]
38. When envoys are sent with compliments in their mouths, it is a sign that
the enemy wishes for a truce.
[TuMusays: "Iftheenemyopenfriendlyrelationsbesendinghostages,it
isasignthattheyareanxiousforanarmistice,eitherbecausetheirstrength
is exhausted or for some other reason." But it hardly needs a Sun Tzu to
draw such an obvious inference.]
39. If the enemy’s troops march up angrily and remain facing ours for a long
time without either joining battle or taking themselves off again, the situ-
ation is one that demandsgreat vigilance and circumspection.
[Ts‘ao Kung says a maneuver of this sort may be only a ruse to gain time
for an unexpected ﬂank attack or the laying of an ambush.]
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 84
40. If our troops are no more in number than the enemy, that is amply sufﬁ-
cient; it only means thatno direct attack can be made.
[Literally,"nomartialadvance."Thatistosay,CHENGtacticsandfrontal
attacks must be eschewed, and stratagem resorted to instead.]
What we can do is simply to concentrate all our available strength, keep a
close watch on the enemy, and obtain reinforcements.
[This is an obscure sentence, and none of the commentators succeed in
squeezingverygoodsenseoutofit. IfollowLiCh‘uan,whoappearstoof-
fer the simplest explanation: "Only the side that gets more men will win."
Fortunately we have Chang Yu to expound its meaning to us in language
which is lucidity itself: "When the numbers are even, and no favorable
opening presents itself, although we may not be strong enough to deliver
a sustained attack, we can ﬁnd additional recruits amongst our sutlers and
camp-followers, and then, concentrating our forces and keeping a close
watch on the enemy, contrive to snatch the victory. But we must avoid
borrowingforeignsoldierstohelpus."HethenquotesfromWeiLiaoTzu,
ch. 3: "The nominal strength of mercenary troops may be 100,000, but
their real value will be not more than half that ﬁgure."]
41. He who exercises no forethought but makes light of his opponents is sure
to be captured by them.
[Ch‘enHao, quoting fromtheTSO CHUAN, says: "If beesandscorpions
carry poison, how much more will a hostile state! Even a puny opponent,
then, should not be treatedwith contempt."]
42. If soldiers are punished before they have grown attached to you, they will
notprovesubmissive;and,unlesssubmissive,thenwillbepracticallyuse-
less. If, when the soldiers have become attached to you, punishments are
not enforced, they will still be unless.
43. Therefore soldiers must be treated in the ﬁrst instance with humanity, but
kept under control by meansof iron discipline.
[Yen Tzu [B.C. 493] said of Ssu-ma Jang-chu: "His civil virtues endeared
him to the people; his martial prowess kept his enemies in awe." Cf. Wu
Tzu, ch. 4 init.: "The ideal commander unites culture with a warlike tem-
per;theprofessionofarmsrequiresacombinationofhardnessandtender-
ness."]
This is a certain road to victory.
44. If in training soldiers commands are habitually enforced, the army will be
well-disciplined; if not,its discipline will be bad.
45. If a general shows conﬁdence in his men but always insists on his orders
being obeyed,
CHAPTER 10. THE ARMY ON THE MARCH 85
[TuMusays: "Ageneraloughtintimeofpeacetoshowkindlyconﬁdence
in his men and also make his authority respected, so that when they come
to face the enemy, orders may be executed and discipline maintained, be-
cause they all trust and look up to him." What Sun Tzu has said in ss. 44,
however,wouldleadonerathertoexpectsomethinglikethis: "Ifageneral
is always conﬁdent that his orders will be carried out," etc."]
the gain will be mutual.
[Chang Yu says: "The general has conﬁdence in the men under his com-
mand, and the men are docile, having conﬁdence in him. Thus the gain is
mutual" He quotes a pregnant sentence from Wei Liao Tzu, ch. 4: "The
art of giving orders is not to try to rectify minor blunders and not to be
swayedbypettydoubts."Vacillationandfussinessarethesurestmeansof
sapping the conﬁdence of anarmy.]
Chapter 11
TERRAIN
[Only about a third of the chapter, comprising ss. ss. 1-13, deals with "terrain," the
subject being more fully treated in ch. XI. The "six calamities" are discussed in SS.
14-20, and the rest of the chapter is again a mere string of desultory remarks, though
not less interesting, perhaps, on that account.]
1. Sun Tzu said: We may distinguish six kinds of terrain, to wit:
(1) Accessible ground;
[MeiYao-ch‘ensays: "plentifullyprovidedwithroadsandmeansofcom-
munications."]
(2) entangling ground;
[Thesamecommentatorsays: "Net-likecountry,venturingintowhichyou
become entangled."]
(3) temporizing ground;
[Ground which allows you to"stave off" or "delay."]
(4) narrow passes;
(5) precipitous heights;
(6) positions at a great distance from the enemy.
[It is hardly necessary to point out the faultiness of this classiﬁcation. A
strangelackoflogicalperceptionisshownintheChinaman’sunquestion-
ing acceptance of glaring cross- divisions such as the above.]
2. Ground which can be freely traversed by both sides is called ACCESS-
IBLE.
3. Withregardtogroundofthisnature,bebeforetheenemyinoccupyingthe
raised and sunny spots, and carefully guard your line of supplies.
86
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 87
[Thegeneralmeaningofthelastphraseisdoubtlessly,asTuYusays,"not
to allow the enemy to cut your communications." In view of Napoleon’s
dictum, "the secret of war lies in the communications,"1we could wish
that Sun Tzu had done more than skirt the edge of this important subject
here and in I. ss. 10, VII. ss. 11. Col. Henderson says: "The line of
supply may be said to be as vital to the existence of an army as the heart
to the life of a human being. Just as the duelist who ﬁnds his adversary’s
point menacing him with certain death, and his own guard astray, is com-
pelled to conform to his adversary’s movements, and to content himself
with warding off his thrusts, so the commander whose communications
are suddenly threatened ﬁnds himself in a false position, and he will be
fortunate if he has not to change all his plans, to split up his force into
more or less isolated detachments, and to ﬁght with inferior numbers on
ground which he has not had time to prepare, and where defeat will not
be an ordinary failure, but will entail the ruin or surrender of his whole
army."2
Then you will be able to ﬁght with advantage.
4. Ground which can be abandoned but is hard to re-occupy is called EN-
TANGLING.
5. From a position of this sort, if the enemy is unprepared, you may sally
forth and defeat him. But if the enemy is prepared for your coming, and
you fail to defeat him, then, return being impossible, disaster will ensue.
6. When the position is such that neither side will gain by making the ﬁrst
move, it is called TEMPORIZING ground.
[Tu Mu says: "Each side ﬁnds it inconvenient to move, and the situation
remains at a deadlock."]
7. Inapositionofthissort,eventhoughtheenemyshouldofferusanattract-
ive bait,
[Tu Yu says, "turning their backs on us and pretending to ﬂee." But this is
only one of the lures whichmight induce us to quit our position.]
it will be advisable not to stir forth, but rather to retreat, thus enticing the
enemy in his turn; then, when part of his army has come out, we may
deliver our attack with advantage.
8. Withregard to NARROWPASSES, ifyou can occupy them ﬁrst,let them
be strongly garrisoned and await the advent of the enemy.
[Because then, as Tu Yu observes, "the initiative will lie with us, and by
making sudden and unexpected attacks we shall have the enemy at our
mercy."]
1See "Pensees de Napoleon 1er," no. 47.
2"The Science of War," chap. 2.
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 88
9. Should the army forestall you in occupying a pass, do not go after him if
the pass is fully garrisoned, but only if it is weakly garrisoned.
10. WithregardtoPRECIPITOUSHEIGHTS,ifyouarebeforehandwithyour
adversary, you should occupy the raised and sunny spots, and there wait
for him to come up.
[Ts‘ao Kung says: "The particular advantage of securing heights and de-
ﬁles is that your actions cannot then be dictated by the enemy." [For the
enunciationofthegrandprinciplealludedto,seeVI.ss. 2]. ChangYutells
thefollowinganecdoteofP‘eiHsing-chien(A.D.619-682),whowassent
onapunitiveexpeditionagainsttheTurkictribes. "Atnighthepitchedhis
camp as usual, and it had already been completely fortiﬁed by wall and
ditch,whensuddenlyhegaveordersthatthearmyshouldshiftitsquarters
toahillnearby. Thiswashighlydispleasingtohisofﬁcers,whoprotested
loudly against the extra fatigue which it would entail on the men. P‘ei
Hsing- chien, however, paid no heed to their remonstrances and had the
campmovedasquicklyaspossible. Thesamenight,aterriﬁcstormcame
on, which ﬂooded their former place of encampment to the depth of over
twelve feet. The recalcitrant ofﬁcers were amazed at the sight, and owned
that they had been in the wrong. ’How did you know what was going to
happen?’ they asked. P‘ei Hsing-chien replied: ’From this time forward
be content to obey orders without asking unnecessary questions.’ From
this it may be seen," Chang Yu continues, "that high and sunny places are
advantageousnotonlyforﬁghting,butalsobecausetheyareimmunefrom
disastrous ﬂoods."]
11. Iftheenemyhasoccupiedthembeforeyou,donotfollowhim,butretreat
and try to entice him away.
[The turning point of Li Shih-min’s campaign in 621 A.D. against the
two rebels, Tou Chien-te, King of Hsia, and Wang Shih-ch‘ung, Prince
of Cheng, was his seizure of the heights of Wu-lao, in spike of which
Tou Chien-te persisted in his attempt to relieve his ally in Lo-yang, was
defeated and taken prisoner. See CHIU T‘ANG, ch. 2, fol. 5 verso, and
also ch. 54.]
12. If you are situated at a great distance from the enemy, and the strength of
the two armies is equal, it is not easy to provoke a battle,
[The point is that we must not think of undertaking a long and wearisome
march, at the end of which, as Tu Yu says, "we should be exhausted and
our adversary fresh and keen."]
and ﬁghting will be to yourdisadvantage.
13. These six are the principles connected with Earth.
[Or perhaps, "the principles relating to ground." See, however, I. ss. 8.]
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 89
The general who has attained a responsible post must be careful to study
them.
14. Nowanarmyisexposedtosixseveralcalamities,notarisingfromnatural
causes, but from faults forwhich the general is responsible. These are:
(1) Flight;
(2) insubordination;
(3) collapse;
(4) ruin;
(5) disorganization;
(6) rout.
15. Other conditions being equal, if one force is hurled against another ten
times its size, the result will be the FLIGHT of the former.
16. When the common soldiers are too strong and their ofﬁcers too weak, the
result is INSUBORDINATION.
[TuMucitestheunhappycaseofT‘ienPu[HSINT‘ANGSHU,ch. 148],
whowassenttoWeiin821A.D.withorderstoleadanarmyagainstWang
T‘ing-ts‘ou. But the whole time he was in command, his soldiers treated
him with the utmost contempt, and openly ﬂouted his authority by riding
about the camp on donkeys, several thousands at a time. T‘ien Pu was
powerless to put a stop to this conduct, and when, after some months had
passed,hemadeanattempttoengagetheenemy,histroopsturnedtailand
dispersed in every direction. After that, the unfortunate man committed
suicide by cutting his throat.]
When the ofﬁcers are too strong and the common soldiers too weak, the
result is COLLAPSE.
[Ts‘ao Kung says: "The ofﬁcers are energetic and want to press on, the
common soldiers are feeble and suddenly collapse."]
17. When the higher ofﬁcers are angry and insubordinate, and on meeting the
enemy give battle on their own account from a feeling of resentment, be-
fore the commander-in-chief can tell whether or no he is in a position to
ﬁght, the result is RUIN.
[WangHsi‘snoteis: "Thismeans,thegeneralisangrywithoutcause,and
atthesametimedoesnotappreciatetheabilityofhissubordinateofﬁcers;
thushearousesﬁerceresentmentandbringsanavalancheofruinuponhis
head."]
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 90
18. When the general is weak and without authority; when his orders are not
clear and distinct;
[Wei Liao Tzu (ch. 4) says: "If the commander gives his orders with
decision, the soldiers will not wait to hear them twice; if his moves are
madewithoutvacillation,thesoldierswillnotbeintwomindsaboutdoing
theirduty."GeneralBaden-Powellsays,italicizingthewords: "Thesecret
of getting successful work out of your trained men lies in one nutshell–in
the clearness of the instructions they receive."3Cf. also Wu Tzu ch. 3:
"themostfataldefectinamilitaryleaderisdifference;theworstcalamities
that befall an army arisefrom hesitation."]
when there are no ﬁxes duties assigned to ofﬁcers and men,
[Tu Mu says: "Neither ofﬁcers nor men have any regular routine."]
and the ranks are formed in a slovenly haphazard manner, the result is
utter DISORGANIZATION. 19. When a general, unable to estimate the
enemy’s strength, allows an inferior force to engage a larger one, or hurls
a weak detachment against a powerful one, and neglects to place picked
soldiers in the front rank, the result must be ROUT.
[ChangYuparaphrasesthelatterpartofthesentenceandcontinues: "Whenever
thereisﬁghtingtobedone,thekeenestspiritsshouldbeappointedtoserve
inthefrontranks,bothinordertostrengthentheresolutionofourownmen
and to demoralize the enemy." Cf. the primi ordines of Caesar ("De Bello
Gallico," V. 28, 44, et al.).]
20. These are six ways of courting defeat, which must be carefully noted by
the general who has attained a responsible post. [See supra, ss. 13.]
21. The natural formation of the country is the soldier’s best ally;
[Ch‘en Hao says: "The advantages of weather and season are not equal to
those connected with ground."]
butapowerofestimatingtheadversary,ofcontrollingtheforcesofvictory,
andofshrewdlycalculatingdifﬁculties,dangersanddistances,constitutes
the test of a great general.
22. He who knows these things, and in ﬁghting puts his knowledge into prac-
tice,willwinhisbattles. Hewhoknowsthemnot,norpracticesthem,will
surely be defeated.
23. Ifﬁghting issure toresult invictory, thenyou mustﬁght, eventhough the
rulerforbidit;ifﬁghtingwillnotresultinvictory,thenyoumustnotﬁght
even at the ruler’s bidding.
3"Aids to Scouting," p. xii.
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 91
[Cf. VIII. ss. 3 ﬁn. Huang Shih-kung of the Ch‘in dynasty, who is said to
havebeenthepatronofChangLiangandtohavewrittentheSANLUEH,
hasthesewordsattributedtohim: "Theresponsibilityofsettinganarmyin
motion must devolve on the general alone; if advance and retreat are con-
trolledfromthePalace,brilliantresultswillhardlybeachieved. Hencethe
god-like ruler and the enlightened monarch are content to play a humble
partinfurtheringtheircountry’scause[lit.,kneeldowntopushthechariot
wheel]."Thismeansthat"inmatterslyingoutsidethezenana,thedecision
of the military commander must be absolute." Chang Yu also quote the
saying: "Decrees from the Son of Heaven do not penetrate the walls of a
camp."]
24. The general who advances without coveting fame and retreats without
fearing disgrace,
[It was Wellington, I think, who said that the hardest thing of all for a
soldier is to retreat.]
whose only thought is to protect his country and do good service for his
sovereign, is the jewel of the kingdom.
[Anoblepresentiment,infewwords,oftheChinese"happywarrior."Such
aman,saysHoShih,"evenifhehadtosufferpunishment,wouldnotregret
his conduct."]
25. Regard your soldiers as your children, and they will follow you into the
deepest valleys; look upon them as your own beloved sons, and they will
stand by you even unto death.
[Cf. I.ss. 6. Inthisconnection,TuMudrawsforusanengagingpictureof
thefamousgeneralWuCh‘i,fromwhosetreatiseonwarIhavefrequently
had occasion to quote: "He wore the same clothes and ate the same food
as the meanest of his soldiers, refused to have either a horse to ride or a
mat to sleep on, carried his own surplus rations wrapped in a parcel, and
shared every hardship with his men. One of his soldiers was suffering
from an abscess, and Wu Ch‘i himself sucked out the virus. The soldier’s
mother, hearing this, began wailing and lamenting. Somebody asked her,
saying: ’Why do you cry? Your son is only a common soldier, and yet
thecommander-in-chiefhimselfhassuckedthepoisonfromhissore.’ The
womanreplied,’Manyyearsago,LordWuperformedasimilarservicefor
my husband, who never left him afterwards, and ﬁnally met his death at
thehandsoftheenemy. Andnowthathehasdonethesameformyson,he
toowillfallﬁghtingIknownotwhere.’"LiCh‘uanmentionstheViscount
ofCh‘u,whoinvadedthesmallstateofHsiaoduringthewinter. TheDuke
ofShensaidtohim: "Manyofthesoldiersaresufferingseverelyfromthe
cold."Sohemadearoundofthewholearmy,comfortingandencouraging
themen;andstraightwaytheyfeltasiftheywereclothedingarmentslined
with ﬂoss silk.]
CHAPTER 11. TERRAIN 92
26. If, however, you are indulgent, but unable to make your authority felt;
kind-hearted,butunabletoenforceyourcommands;andincapable,moreover,
ofquellingdisorder: thenyoursoldiersmustbelikenedtospoiltchildren;
they are useless for any practical purpose.
[Li Ching once said that if you could make your soldiers afraid of you,
they would not be afraid of the enemy. Tu Mu recalls an instance of stern
military discipline which occurred in 219 A.D., when Lu Meng was oc-
cupying the town of Chiang-ling. He had given stringent orders to his
army not to molest the inhabitants nor take anything from them by force.
Nevertheless, a certain ofﬁcer serving under his banner, who happened to
be a fellow-townsman, ventured to appropriate a bamboo hat belonging
to one of the people, in order to wear it over his regulation helmet as a
protection against the rain. Lu Meng considered that the fact of his being
also a native of Ju-nan should not be allowed to palliate a clear breach of
discipline, and accordingly he ordered his summary execution, the tears
rolling down his face, however, as he did so. This act of severity ﬁlled the
armywithwholesomeawe,andfromthattimeforthevenarticlesdropped
in the highway were not picked up.]
27. Ifwe knowthatour ownmenare inacondition toattack,but areunaware
that the enemy is not open to attack, we have gone only halfway towards
victory.
[That is, Ts‘ao Kung says, "the issue in this case is uncertain."]
28. If we know that the enemy is open to attack, but are unaware that
our own men are not in a condition to attack, we have gone only halfway
towards victory. [Cf. III. ss. 13 (1).]
29. If we know that the enemy is open to attack, and also know that our men
are in a condition to attack, but are unaware that the nature of the ground
makes ﬁghting impracticable, we have still gone only halfway towards
victory.
30. Hence the experienced soldier, once in motion, is never bewildered; once
he has broken camp, he is never at a loss.
[The reason being, according to Tu Mu, that he has taken his measures
so thoroughly as to ensure victory beforehand. "He does not move reck-
lessly," says Chang Yu, "so that when he does move, he makes no mis-
takes."]
31. Hencethesaying: Ifyouknowtheenemyandknowyourself,yourvictory
will not stand in doubt; if you know Heaven and know Earth, you may
make your victory complete.
[Li Ch‘uan sums up as follows: "Given a knowledge of three things–the
affairsofmen,theseasonsofheavenandthenaturaladvantagesofearth–,
victory will invariably crown your battles."]
Chapter 12
THE NINE SITUATIONS
1. Sun Tzu said: The artof war recognizes nine varieties of ground:
(1) Dispersive ground;
(2) facile ground;
(3) contentious ground;
(4) open ground;
(5) ground of intersecting highways;
(6) serious ground;
(7) difﬁcult ground;
(8) hemmed-in ground;
(9) desperate ground.
2. When a chieftain is ﬁghting in his own territory, it is dispersive ground.
[So called because the soldiers, being near to their homes and anxious to
see their wives and children, are likely to seize the opportunity afforded
by a battle and scatter in every direction. "In their advance," observes Tu
Mu, "they will lack the valor of desperation, and when they retreat, they
will ﬁnd harbors of refuge."]
3. Whenhehaspenetratedintohostileterritory,buttonogreatdistance,itis
facile ground.
[Li Ch‘uan and Ho Shih say "because of the facility for retreating," and
theothercommentatorsgivesimilarexplanations. TuMuremarks: "When
yourarmyhascrossedtheborder,youshouldburnyourboatsandbridges,
in order to make it clear to everybody that you have no hankering after
home."]
93
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 94
4. Ground the possession of which imports great advantage to either side, is
contentious ground.
[Tu Mu deﬁnes the ground as ground "to be contended for." Ts‘ao Kung
says: "ground on which the few and the weak can defeat the many and
the strong," such as "the neck of a pass," instanced by Li Ch‘uan. Thus,
Thermopylae was of this classiﬁcation because the possession of it, even
for a few days only, meant holding the entire invading army in check and
thus gaining invaluable time. Cf. Wu Tzu, ch. V. ad init.: "For those who
havetoﬁghtintheratioofonetoten,thereisnothingbetterthananarrow
pass." When Lu Kuang was returning from his triumphant expedition to
Turkestan in 385 A.D., and had got as far as I-ho, laden with spoils, Li-
ang Hsi, administrator of Liang-chou, taking advantage of the death of Fu
Chien,KingofCh‘in,plottedagainsthimandwasforbarringhiswayinto
the province. Yang Han, governor of Kao-ch‘ang, counseled him, saying:
"LuKuangisfreshfromhisvictoriesinthewest,andhissoldiersarevig-
orousandmettlesome. Ifweopposehimintheshiftingsandsofthedesert,
we shall be no match for him, and we must therefore try a different plan.
Let us hasten to occupy the deﬁle at the mouth of the Kao-wu pass, thus
cutting him off from supplies of water, and when his troops are prostrated
with thirst, we can dictate our own terms without moving. Or if you think
that the pass I mention is too far off, we could make a stand against him
at the I-wu pass, which is nearer. The cunning and resource of Tzu-fang
himselfwouldbeexpendedinvainagainsttheenormousstrengthofthese
twopositions."LiangHsi,refusingtoactonthisadvice,wasoverwhelmed
and swept away by the invader.]
5. Ground on which each side has liberty of movement is open ground.
[There are various interpretations of the Chinese adjective for this type of
ground. Ts‘ao Kung says it means "ground covered with a network of
roads," like a chessboard. Ho Shih suggested: "ground on which inter-
communication is easy."]
6. Ground which forms the key to three contiguous states,
[Ts‘au Kung deﬁnes this as: "Our country adjoining the enemy’s and a
third country conterminous with both." Meng Shih instances the small
principality of Cheng, which was bounded on the north-east by Ch‘i, on
the west by Chin, and on thesouth by Ch‘u.]
so that he who occupies itﬁrst has most of the Empire at his command,
[Thebelligerentwhoholdsthisdominatingpositioncanconstrainmostof
them to become his allies.]
is a ground of intersectinghighways.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 95
7. When an army has penetrated into the heart of a hostile country, leaving a
number of fortiﬁed citiesin its rear, it is serious ground.
[Wang Hsi explains the name by saying that "when an army has reached
such a point, its situationis serious."]
8. Mountain forests, [Or simply "forests."]
ruggedsteeps,marshesandfens–allcountrythatishardtotraverse: thisis
difﬁcult ground.
9. Ground which is reached through narrow gorges, and from which we can
only retire by tortuous paths, so that a small number of the enemy would
sufﬁce to crush a large bodyof our men: this is hemmed in ground.
10. Groundonwhichwecanonlybesavedfromdestructionbyﬁghtingwithout
delay, is desperate ground.
[Thesituation,aspicturedbyTs‘aoKung,isverysimilartothe"hemmed-
inground"exceptthathereescapeisnolongerpossible: "Aloftymountain
in front, a large river behind, advance impossible, retreat blocked." Ch‘en
Hao says: "to be on ’desperate ground’ is like sitting in a leaking boat
or crouching in a burning house." Tu Mu quotes from Li Ching a vivid
description of the plight of an army thus entrapped: "Suppose an army
invading hostile territory without the aid of local guides: – it falls into a
fatalsnareandisattheenemy’smercy. Aravineontheleft,amountainon
the right, a pathway so perilous that the horses have to be roped together
and the chariots carried in slings, no passage open in front, retreat cut
off behind, no choice but to proceed in single ﬁle. Then, before there is
time to range our soldiers in order of battle, the enemy is overwhelming
strength suddenly appears on the scene. Advancing, we can nowhere take
a breathing-space; retreating, we have no haven of refuge. We seek a
pitched battle, but in vain; yet standing on the defensive, none of us has
a moment’s respite. If we simply maintain our ground, whole days and
months will crawl by; the moment we make a move, we have to sustain
the enemy’s attacks on front and rear. The country is wild, destitute of
water and plants; the army is lacking in the necessaries of life, the horses
are jaded and the men worn-out, all the resources of strength and skill
unavailing, the pass so narrow that a single man defending it can check
the onset of ten thousand; all means of offense in the hands of the enemy,
all points of vantage already forfeited by ourselves:–in this terrible plight,
even though we had the most valiant soldiers and the keenest of weapons,
how could they be employed with the slightest effect?" Students of Greek
history may be reminded of the awful close to the Sicilian expedition,
and the agony of the Athenians under Nicias and Demonsthenes. [See
Thucydides, VII. 78 sqq.].]
11. On dispersive ground, therefore, ﬁght not. On facile ground, halt not. On
contentious ground, attacknot.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 96
[But rather let all your energies be bent on occupying the advantageous
positionﬁrst. SoTs‘aoKung. LiCh‘uanandothers,however,supposethe
meaning to be that the enemy has already forestalled us, sot that it would
be sheer madness to attack. In the SUN TZU HSU LU, when the King
of Wu inquires what should be done in this case, Sun Tzu replies: "The
rule with regard to contentious ground is that those in possession have the
advantage over the other side. If a position of this kind is secured ﬁrst by
theenemy,bewareofattackinghim. Lurehimawaybypretendingtoﬂee–
show your banners and sound your drums–make a dash for other places
that he cannot afford to lose–trail brushwood and raise a dust–confound
his ears and eyes–detach a body of your best troops, and place it secretly
in ambuscade. Then your opponent will sally forth to the rescue."]
12. On open ground, do not try to block the enemy’s way.
[Becausetheattemptwouldbefutile,andwouldexposetheblockingforce
itselftoseriousrisks. Therearetwointerpretationsavailablehere. Ifollow
thatofChangYu. TheotherisindicatedinTs‘aoKung’sbriefnote: "Draw
closer together"–i.e., see that a portion of your own army is not cut off.]
On the ground of intersecting highways, join hands with your allies.
[Or perhaps, "form alliances with neighboring states."]
13. On serious ground, gather in plunder.
[Onthis,LiCh‘uanhasthefollowingdeliciousnote: "Whenanarmypen-
etrates far into the enemy’s country, care must be taken not to alienate the
people by unjust treatment. Follow the example of the Han Emperor Kao
Tsu, whose march into Ch‘in territory was marked by no violation of wo-
men or looting of valuables. [Nota bene: this was in 207 B.C., and may
wellcauseustoblushfortheChristianarmiesthatenteredPekingin1900
A.D.] Thus he won the hearts of all. In the present passage, then, I think
that the true reading must be, not ’plunder,’ but ’do not plunder.’" Alas,
I fear that in this instance the worthy commentator’s feelings outran his
judgment. Tu Mu, at least, has no such illusions. He says: "When en-
camped on ’serious ground,’ there being no inducement as yet to advance
further,andnopossibilityofretreat,oneoughttotakemeasuresforapro-
tractedresistancebybringinginprovisionsfromallsides,andkeepaclose
watch on the enemy."]
In difﬁcult ground, keep steadily on the march.
[Or, in the words of VIII. ss. 2, "do not encamp.]
14. On hemmed-in ground,resort to stratagem.
[Ts‘au Kung says: "Try the effect of some unusual artiﬁce;" and Tu Yu
ampliﬁes this by saying: "In such a position, some scheme must be de-
visedwhichwillsuitthecircumstances,andifwecansucceedindeluding
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 97
the enemy, the peril may be escaped." This is exactly what happened on
the famous occasion when Hannibal was hemmed in among the moun-
tains on the road to Casilinum, and to all appearances entrapped by the
dictator Fabius. The stratagem which Hannibal devised to bafﬂe his foes
wasremarkablylikethatwhichT‘ienTanhadalsoemployedwithsuccess
exactly 62 years before. [See IX. ss. 24, note.] When night came on,
bundlesof twigswere fastenedto thehorns ofsome 2000oxen andset on
ﬁre,theterriﬁedanimalsbeingthenquicklydrivenalongthemountainside
towards the passes which were beset by the enemy. The strange spectacle
of these rapidly moving lights so alarmed and discomﬁted the Romans
thattheywithdrewfromtheirposition,andHannibal’sarmypassedsafely
through the deﬁle. [See Polybius, III. 93, 94; Livy, XXII. 16 17.]
On desperate ground, ﬁght.
[For, as Chia Lin remarks: "if you ﬁght with all your might, there is a
chance of life; where as death is certain if you cling to your corner."]
15. Those who were called skillful leaders of old knew how to drive a wedge
between the enemy’s frontand rear;
[More literally, "cause the front and rear to lose touch with each other."]
topreventco-operationbetweenhislargeandsmalldivisions;tohinderthe
good troops from rescuing the bad, the ofﬁcers from rallying their men.
16. When the enemy’s men were united, they managed to keep them in dis-
order.
17. When it was to their advantage, they made a forward move; when other-
wise, they stopped still.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en connects this with the foregoing: "Having succeeded in
thus dislocating the enemy, they would push forward in order to secure
any advantage to be gained; if there was no advantage to be gained, they
would remain where they were."]
18. If asked how to cope with a great host of the enemy in orderly array and
on the point of marching to the attack, I should say: "Begin by seizing
something which your opponent holds dear; then he will be amenable to
your will."
[Opinions differ as to what Sun Tzu had in mind. Ts‘ao Kung thinks it
is "some strategical advantage on which the enemy is depending." Tu Mu
says: "The three things which an enemy is anxious to do, and on the ac-
complishment of which his success depends, are: (1) to capture our fa-
vorable positions; (2) to ravage our cultivated land; (3) to guard his own
communications." Our object then must be to thwart his plans in these
three directions and thus render him helpless. [Cf. III. ss. 3.] By boldly
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 98
seizing the initiative in this way, you at once throw the other side on the
defensive.]
19. Rapidity is the essence of war:
[According to Tu Mu, "this is a summary of leading principles in war-
fare," and he adds: "These are the profoundest truths of military science,
andthechiefbusinessofthegeneral."Thefollowinganecdotes,toldbyHo
Shih, shows the importance attached to speed by two of China’s greatest
generals. In 227 A.D., Meng Ta, governor of Hsin-ch‘eng under the Wei
Emperor Wen Ti, was meditating defection to the House of Shu, and had
entered into correspondence with Chu-ko Liang, Prime Minister of that
State. The Wei general Ssu-ma I was then military governor of Wan, and
getting wind of Meng Ta’s treachery, he at once set off with an army to
anticipatehisrevolt,havingpreviouslycajoledhimbyaspeciousmessage
of friendly import. Ssu-ma’s ofﬁcers came to him and said: "If Meng Ta
has leagued himself with Wu and Shu, the matter should be thoroughly
investigated before we make a move." Ssu-ma I replied: "Meng Ta is an
unprincipledman,andweoughttogoandpunishhimatonce,whileheis
stillwaveringandbeforehehasthrownoffthemask."Then,byaseriesof
forced marches, be brought his army under the walls of Hsin-ch‘eng with
in a space of eight days. Now Meng Ta had previously said in a letter to
Chu-ko Liang: "Wan is 1200 LI from here. When the news of my revolt
reachesSsu-maI,hewillatonceinformhisimperialmaster,butitwillbe
awholemonthbeforeanystepscanbetaken,andbythattimemycitywill
be well fortiﬁed. Besides, Ssu-ma I is sure not to come himself, and the
generals that will be sent against us are not worth troubling about." The
next letter, however, was ﬁlled with consternation: "Though only eight
days have passed since I threw off my allegiance, an army is already at
the city-gates. What miraculous rapidity is this!" A fortnight later, Hsin-
ch‘eng had fallen and Meng Ta had lost his head. [See CHIN SHU, ch.
1, f. 3.] In 621 A.D., Li Ching was sent from K‘uei-chou in Ssu-ch‘uan
to reduce the successful rebel Hsiao Hsien, who had set up as Emperor at
the modern Ching-chou Fu in Hupeh. It was autumn, and the Yangtsze
being then in ﬂood, Hsiao Hsien never dreamt that his adversary would
venturetocomedownthroughthegorges,andconsequentlymadenopre-
parations. But Li Ching embarked his army without loss of time, and was
just about to start when the other generals implored him to postpone his
departure until the river was in a less dangerous state for navigation. Li
Ching replied: "To the soldier, overwhelming speed is of paramount im-
portance, and he must never miss opportunities. Now is the time to strike,
before Hsiao Hsien even knows that we have got an army together. If we
seize the present moment when the river is in ﬂood, we shall appear be-
fore his capital with startling suddenness, like the thunder which is heard
before you have time to stop your ears against it. [See VII. ss. 19, note.]
Thisisthegreatprincipleinwar. Evenifhegetstoknowofourapproach,
he will have to levy his soldiers in such a hurry that they will not be ﬁt to
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 99
oppose us. Thus the full fruits of victory will be ours." All came about as
he predicted, and Hsiao Hsien was obliged to surrender, nobly stipulating
that his people should be spared and he alone suffer the penalty of death.]
takeadvantageoftheenemy’sunreadiness,makeyourwaybyunexpected
routes, and attack unguarded spots.
20. The following are the principles to be observed by an invading force: The
further you penetrate into a country, the greater will be the solidarity of
your troops, and thus the defenders will not prevail against you.
21. Make forays in fertile country in order to supply your army with food.
[Cf. supra, ss. 13. Li Ch‘uan does not venture on a note here.]
22. Carefully study the well-being of your men,
[For "well-being", Wang Hsi means, "Pet them, humor them, give them
plenty of food and drink, andlook after them generally."]
anddonotovertaxthem. Concentrateyourenergyandhoardyourstrength.
[Ch‘enrecallsthelineofactionadoptedin224B.C.bythefamousgeneral
Wang Chien, whose military genius largely contributed to the success of
the First Emperor. He had invaded the Ch‘u State, where a universal levy
was made to oppose him. But, being doubtful of the temper of his troops,
he declined all invitations to ﬁght and remained strictly on the defens-
ive. In vain did the Ch‘u general try to force a battle: day after day Wang
Chienkeptinsidehiswallsandwouldnotcomeout,butdevotedhiswhole
time and energy to winning the affection and conﬁdence of his men. He
took care that they should be well fed, sharing his own meals with them,
provided facilities for bathing, and employed every method of judicious
indulgence to weld them into a loyal and homogenous body. After some
timehadelapsed,hetoldoffcertainpersonstoﬁndouthowthemenwere
amusingthemselves. Theanswerwas,thattheywerecontendingwithone
anotherinputtingtheweightandlong-jumping. WhenWangChienheard
that they were engaged in these athletic pursuits, he knew that their spir-
its had been strung up to the required pitch and that they were now ready
for ﬁghting. By this time the Ch‘u army, after repeating their challenge
again and again, had marched away eastwards in disgust. The Ch‘in gen-
eral immediately broke up his camp and followed them, and in the battle
that ensued they were routed with great slaughter. Shortly afterwards, the
whole of Ch‘u was conquered by Ch‘in, and the king Fu-ch‘u led into
captivity.]
Keep your army continuallyon the move,
[In order that the enemy may never know exactly where you are. It has
struck me, however, that the true reading might be "link your army to-
gether."]
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 100
and devise unfathomable plans.
23. Throw your soldiers into positions whence there is no escape, and they
will prefer death to ﬂight. If they will face death, there is nothing they
may not achieve.
[Chang Yu quotes his favorite Wei Liao Tzu (ch. 3): "If one man were to
run amok with a sword in the market-place, and everybody else tried to
getour ofhis way,I shouldnot allowthat thisman alonehad courageand
that all the rest were contemptible cowards. The truth is, that a desperado
and a man who sets some value on his life do not meet on even terms."]
Ofﬁcers and men alike will put forth their uttermost strength.
[ChangYusays: "Iftheyareinanawkwardplacetogether,theywillsurely
exert their united strengthto get out of it."]
24. Soldierswhenindesperatestraitslosethesenseoffear. Ifthereisnoplace
ofrefuge,theywillstandﬁrm. Iftheyareinhostilecountry,theywillshow
a stubborn front. If there isno help for it, they will ﬁght hard.
25. Thus, without waiting to be marshaled, the soldiers will be constantly on
the qui vive; without waiting to be asked, they will do your will;
[Literally, "without asking, you will get."]
without restrictions, they will be faithful; without giving orders, they can
be trusted.
26. Prohibitthetakingofomens,anddoawaywithsuperstitiousdoubts. Then,
until death itself comes,no calamity need be feared.
[The superstitious, "bound in to saucy doubts and fears," degenerate into
cowards and "die many times before their deaths." Tu Mu quotes Huang
Shih-kung: "’Spells and incantations should be strictly forbidden, and no
ofﬁcer allowed to inquire by divination into the fortunes of an army, for
fear the soldiers’ minds should be seriously perturbed.’ The meaning is,"
he continues, "that if all doubts and scruples are discarded, your men will
never falter in their resolution until they die."]
27. Ifoursoldiersarenotoverburdenedwithmoney,itisnotbecausetheyhave
adistasteforriches;iftheirlivesarenotundulylong,itisnotbecausethey
are disinclined to longevity.
[Chang Yu has the best note on this passage: "Wealth and long life are
things for which all men have a natural inclination. Hence, if they burn or
ﬂingawayvaluables,andsacriﬁcetheirownlives,itisnotthattheydislike
them, but simply that they have no choice." Sun Tzu is slyly insinuating
that, as soldiers are but human, it is for the general to see that temptations
to shirk ﬁghting and grow rich are not thrown in their way.]
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 101
28. On the day they are ordered out to battle, your soldiers may weep,
[ThewordintheChineseis"snivel."Thisistakentoindicatemoregenuine
grief than tears alone.]
thosesittingupbedewingtheirgarments,andthoselyingdownlettingthe
tears run down their cheeks.
[Not because they are afraid, but because, as Ts‘ao Kung says, "all have
embraced the ﬁrm resolution to do or die." We may remember that the
heroesoftheIliadwereequallychildlikeinshowingtheiremotion. Chang
Yu alludes to the mournful parting at the I River between Ching K‘o and
his friends, when the former was sent to attempt the life of the King of
Ch‘in(afterwardsFirstEmperor)in227B.C.Thetearsofallﬂoweddown
like rain as he bade them farewell and uttered the following lines: "The
shrill blast is blowing, Chilly the burn; Your champion is going–Not to
return."1]
But let them once be brought to bay, and they will display the courage of
a Chu or a Kuei.
[Chu was the personal name of Chuan Chu, a native of the Wu State
andcontemporarywithSunTzuhimself,whowasemployedbyKung-tzu
Kuang, better known as Ho Lu Wang, to assassinate his sovereign Wang
Liao with a dagger which he secreted in the belly of a ﬁsh served up at
a banquet. He succeeded in his attempt, but was immediately hacked to
pieced by the king’s bodyguard. This was in 515 B.C. The other hero
referred to, Ts‘ao Kuei (or Ts‘ao Mo), performed the exploit which has
made his name famous 166 years earlier, in 681 B.C. Lu had been thrice
defeated by Ch‘i, and was just about to conclude a treaty surrendering a
large slice of territory, when Ts‘ao Kuei suddenly seized Huan Kung, the
Duke of Ch‘i, as he stood on the altar steps and held a dagger against his
chest. None of the duke’s retainers dared to move a muscle, and Ts‘ao
Kueiproceededtodemandfullrestitution,declaringtheLuwasbeingun-
justlytreatedbecauseshewasasmallerandaweakerstate. HuanKung,in
perilofhislife,wasobligedtoconsent,whereuponTs‘aoKueiﬂungaway
his dagger and quietly resumed his place amid the terriﬁed assemblage
without having so much as changed color. As was to be expected, the
Duke wanted afterwards to repudiate the bargain, but his wise old coun-
selor Kuan Chung pointed out to him the impolicy of breaking his word,
andtheupshotwasthatthisboldstrokeregainedforLuthewholeofwhat
she had lost in three pitched battles.]
29. TheskillfultacticianmaybelikenedtotheSHUAI-JAN.NowtheSHUAI-
JAN is a snake that is found in the Ch‘ang mountains.
1Giles’ Biographical Dictionary, no. 399.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 102
["Shuai-jan"means"suddenly"or"rapidly,"andthesnakeinquestionwas
doubtless so called owing to the rapidity of its movements. Through this
passage, the term in the Chinese has now come to be used in the sense of
"military maneuvers."]
Strike at its head, and you will be attacked by its tail; strike at its tail,
and you will be attacked by its head; strike at its middle, and you will be
attacked by head and tail both.
30. Asked if an army canbe made to imitate the SHUAI-JAN,
[That is, as Mei Yao-ch‘en says, "Is it possible to make the front and rear
of an army each swiftly responsive to attack on the other, just as though
they were part of a single living body?"]
Ishouldanswer,Yes. ForthemenofWuandthemenofYuehareenemies;
[Cf. VI. ss. 21.]
yet if they are crossing a river in the same boat and are caught by a storm,
they will come to each other’s assistance just as the left hand helps the
right.
[Themeaningis: Iftwoenemieswillhelpeachotherinatimeofcommon
peril, how much more should two parts of the same army, bound together
as they are by every tie of interest and fellow-feeling. Yet it is notori-
ous that many a campaign has been ruined through lack of cooperation,
especially in the case of allied armies.]
31. Henceitisnotenoughtoputone’strustinthetetheringofhorses,andthe
burying of chariot wheels in the ground
[These quaint devices to prevent one’s army from running away recall the
Athenian hero Sophanes, who carried the anchor with him at the battle of
Plataea, by means of which he fastened himself ﬁrmly to one spot. [See
Herodotus, IX. 74.] It is not enough, says Sun Tzu, to render ﬂight im-
possible by such mechanical means. You will not succeed unless your
men have tenacity and unity of purpose, and, above all, a spirit of sym-
pathetic cooperation. This is the lesson which can be learned from the
SHUAI-JAN.]
32. The principle on which to manage an army is to set up one standard of
courage which all must reach.
[Literally, "level the courage [of all] as though [it were that of] one." If
the ideal army is to form a single organic whole, then it follows that the
resolutionandspiritofitscomponentpartsmustbeofthesamequality,or
at any rate must not fall below a certain standard. Wellington’s seemingly
ungrateful description of his army at Waterloo as "the worst he had ever
commanded" meant no more than that it was deﬁcient in this important
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 103
particular–unity of spirit and courage. Had he not foreseen the Belgian
defections and carefully kept those troops in the background, he would
almost certainly have lostthe day.]
33. Howtomakethebestofbothstrongandweak–thatisaquestioninvolving
the proper use of ground.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en’s paraphrase is: "The way to eliminate the differences of
strong and weak and to make both serviceable is to utilize accidental fea-
tures of the ground." Less reliable troops, if posted in strong positions,
will hold out as long as better troops on more exposed terrain. The ad-
vantageofpositionneutralizestheinferiorityinstaminaandcourage. Col.
Henderson says: "With all respect to the text books, and to the ordinary
tactical teaching, I am inclined to think that the study of ground is often
overlooked, and that by no means sufﬁcient importance is attached to the
selection of positions... and to the immense advantages that are to be de-
rived, whether you are defending or attacking, from the proper utilization
of natural features."2]
34. Thustheskillfulgeneralconductshisarmyjustasthoughhewereleading
a single man, willy-nilly,by the hand.
[Tu Mu says: "The simile has reference to the ease with which he does
it."]
35. It is the business of a general to be quiet and thus ensure secrecy; upright
and just, and thus maintain order.
36. He must be able to mystify his ofﬁcers and men by false reports and ap-
pearances,
[Literally, "to deceive their eyes and ears."]
and thus keep them in totalignorance.
[Ts‘aoKunggivesusoneofhisexcellentapophthegms: "Thetroopsmust
not be allowed to share your schemes in the beginning; they may only
rejoice with you over their happy outcome." "To mystify, mislead, and
surprise the enemy," is one of the ﬁrst principles in war, as had been fre-
quently pointed out. But how about the other process–the mystiﬁcation
of one’s own men? Those who may think that Sun Tzu is over-emphatic
on this point would do well to read Col. Henderson’s remarks on Stone-
wallJackson’sValleycampaign: "Theinﬁnitepains,"hesays,"withwhich
Jackson sought to conceal, even from his most trusted staff ofﬁcers, his
movements, his intentions, and his thoughts, a commander less thorough
would have pronounced useless"–etc. etc.3In the year 88 A.D., as
we read in ch. 47 of the HOU HAN SHU, "Pan Ch‘ao took the ﬁeld
2"The Science of War," p. 333.
3"Stonewall Jackson," vol. I, p. 421.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 104
with 25,000 men from Khotan and other Central Asian states with the ob-
ject of crushing Yarkand. The King of Kutcha replied by dispatching his
chief commander to succor the place with an army drawn from the king-
doms of Wen-su, Ku-mo, and Wei-t‘ou, totaling 50,000 men. Pan Ch‘ao
summonedhisofﬁcersandalsotheKingofKhotantoacouncilofwar,and
said: ’Our forces are now outnumbered and unable to make head against
the enemy. The best plan, then, is for us to separate and disperse, each in
adifferentdirection. TheKingofKhotanwillmarchawaybytheeasterly
route, and I will then return myself towards the west. Let us wait until
the evening drum has sounded and then start.’ Pan Ch‘ao now secretly
released the prisoners whom he had taken alive, and the King of Kutcha
was thus informed of his plans. Much elated by the news, the latter set
off at once at the head of 10,000 horsemen to bar Pan Ch‘ao’s retreat in
the west, while the King of Wen-su rode eastward with 8000 horse in or-
der to intercept the King of Khotan. As soon as Pan Ch‘ao knew that the
two chieftains had gone, he called his divisions together, got them well
in hand, and at cock-crow hurled them against the army of Yarkand, as
it lay encamped. The barbarians, panic-stricken, ﬂed in confusion, and
were closely pursued by Pan Ch‘ao. Over 5000 heads were brought back
as trophies, besides immense spoils in the shape of horses and cattle and
valuables of every description. Yarkand then capitulating, Kutcha and the
other kingdoms drew off their respective forces. From that time forward,
Pan Ch‘ao’s prestige completely overawed the countries of the west." In
thiscase,weseethattheChinesegeneralnotonlykepthisownofﬁcersin
ignorance of his real plans, but actually took the bold step of dividing his
army in order to deceive theenemy.]
37. By altering his arrangements and changing his plans,
[Wang Hsi thinks that thismeans not using the same stratagem twice.]
he keeps the enemy withoutdeﬁnite knowledge.
[Chang Yu, in a quotation from another work, says: "The axiom, that war
isbasedondeception,doesnotapplyonlytodeceptionoftheenemy. You
must deceive even your own soldiers. Make them follow you, but without
letting them know why."]
By shifting his camp and taking circuitous routes, he prevents the enemy
from anticipating his purpose.
38. Atthecriticalmoment,theleaderofanarmyactslikeonewhohasclimbed
upaheightandthenkicksawaytheladderbehindhim. Hecarrieshismen
deep into hostile territorybefore he shows his hand.
[Literally,"releasesthespring"(seeV.ss. 15),thatis,takessomedecisive
step which makes it impossible for the army to return–like Hsiang Yu,
who sunk his ships after crossing a river. Ch‘en Hao, followed by Chia
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 105
Lin, understands the words less well as "puts forth every artiﬁce at his
command."]
39. He burns his boats and breaks his cooking-pots; like a shepherd driving
a ﬂock of sheep, he drives his men this way and that, and nothing knows
whither he is going.
[Tu Mu says: "The army is only cognizant of orders to advance or retreat;
it is ignorant of the ulterior ends of attacking and conquering."]
40. To muster his host and bring it into danger:–this may be termed the busi-
ness of the general.
[SunTzumeansthataftermobilizationthereshouldbenodelayinaiming
a blow at the enemy’s heart. Note how he returns again and again to this
point. Among thewarringstatesofancientChina,desertionwasnodoubt
amuchmorepresentfearandseriousevilthanitisinthearmiesoftoday.]
41. The different measures suited to the nine varieties of ground;
[ChangYusays: "Onemustnotbehide-boundininterpretingtherulesfor
the nine varieties of ground.]
the expediency of aggressive or defensive tactics; and the fundamental
lawsofhumannature: thesearethingsthatmustmostcertainlybestudied.
42. When invading hostile territory, the general principle is, that penetrating
deeplybringscohesion;penetratingbutashortwaymeansdispersion. [Cf.
supra, ss. 20.]
43. When you leave your own country behind, and take your army across
neighborhood territory, you ﬁnd yourself on critical ground.
[This "ground" is curiously mentioned in VIII. ss. 2, but it does not ﬁgure
among the Nine Situations or the Six Calamities in chap. X. One’s ﬁrst
impulse would be to translate it distant ground," but this, if we can trust
thecommentators,ispreciselywhatisnotmeanthere. MeiYao-ch‘ensays
it is "a position not far enough advanced to be called ’facile,’ and not near
enoughtohometobe’dispersive,’butsomethingbetweenthetwo."Wang
Hsisays: "Itisgroundseparatedfromhomebyaninterjacentstate,whose
territory we have had to cross in order to reach it. Hence, it is incumbent
on us to settle our business there quickly." He adds that this position is of
rareoccurrence,whichisthereasonwhyitisnotincludedamongtheNine
Situations.]
When there are means of communication on all four sides, the ground is
one of intersecting highways.
44. Whenyoupenetratedeeplyintoacountry,itisseriousground. Whenyou
penetrate but a little way,it is facile ground.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 106
45. When you have the enemy’s strongholds on your rear, and narrow passes
in front, it is hemmed-in ground. When there is no place of refuge at all,
it is desperate ground.
46. Therefore, on dispersive ground, I would inspire my men with unity of
purpose.
[This end, according to Tu Mu, is best attained by remaining on the de-
fensive, and avoiding battle. Cf. supra, ss. 11.]
On facile ground, I would see that there is close connection between all
parts of my army.
[AsTuMusays,theobjectistoguardagainsttwopossiblecontingencies:
"(1) the desertion of our own troops; (2) a sudden attack on the part of
the enemy." Cf. VII. ss. 17. Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "On the march, the
regiments should be in close touch; in an encampment, there should be
continuity between the fortiﬁcations."]
47. On contentious ground, I would hurry up my rear.
[This is Ts‘ao Kung’s interpretation. Chang Yu adopts it, saying: "We
must quickly bring up our rear, so that head and tail may both reach the
goal." That is, they must not be allowed to straggle up a long way apart.
Mei Yao-ch‘en offers another equally plausible explanation: "Supposing
the enemy has not yet reached the coveted position, and we are behind
him, we should advance with all speed in order to dispute its possession."
Ch‘en Hao, on the other hand, assuming that the enemy has had time to
select his own ground, quotes VI. ss. 1, where Sun Tzu warns us against
coming exhausted to the attack. His own idea of the situation is rather
vaguely expressed: "If there is a favorable position lying in front of you,
detach a picked body of troops to occupy it, then if the enemy, relying on
their numbers, come up to make a ﬁght for it, you may fall quickly on
their rear with your main body, and victory will be assured." It was thus,
he adds, that Chao She beatthe army of Ch‘in. (See p. 57.)]
48. On open ground, I would keep a vigilant eye on my defenses. On ground
of intersecting highways, Iwould consolidate my alliances.
49. On serious ground, I would try to ensure a continuous stream of supplies.
[Thecommentatorstakethisasreferringtoforageandplunder,not,asone
might expect, to an unbrokencommunication with a home base.]
On difﬁcult ground, I wouldkeep pushing on along the road.
50. On hemmed-in ground,I would block any way of retreat.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 107
[Meng Shih says: "To make it seem that I meant to defend the position,
whereasmyrealintentionistoburstsuddenlythroughtheenemy’slines."
MeiYao-ch‘ensays: "inordertomakemysoldiersﬁghtwithdesperation."
Wang Hsi says, "fearing lest my men be tempted to run away." Tu Mu
pointsoutthatthisistheconverseofVII.ss. 36,whereitistheenemywho
issurrounded. In532A.D.,KaoHuan,afterwardsEmperorandcanonized
as Shen-wu, was surrounded by a great army under Erh- chu Chao and
others. His own force was comparatively small, consisting only of 2000
horse and something under 30,000 foot. The lines of investment had not
been drawn very closely together, gaps being left at certain points. But
Kao Huan, instead of trying to escape, actually made a shift to block all
the remaining outlets himself by driving into them a number of oxen and
donkeysropedtogether. Assoonashisofﬁcersandmensawthattherewas
nothing for it but to conquer or die, their spirits rose to an extraordinary
pitch of exaltation, and they charged with such desperate ferocity that the
opposing ranks broke and crumbled under their onslaught.]
Ondesperateground,Iwouldproclaimtomysoldiersthehopelessnessof
saving their lives.
[Tu Yu says: "Burn your baggage and impedimenta, throw away your
stores and provisions, choke up the wells, destroy your cooking-stoves,
and make it plain to your men that they cannot survive, but must ﬁght to
the death." Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "The only chance of life lies in giving up
all hope of it." This concludes what Sun Tzu has to say about "grounds"
andthe"variations"correspondingtothem. Reviewingthepassageswhich
bearonthisimportantsubject,wecannotfailtobestruckbythedesultory
and unmethodical fashion in which it is treated. Sun Tzu begins abruptly
in VIII. ss. 2 to enumerate "variations" before touching on "grounds" at
all, but only mentions ﬁve, namely nos. 7, 5, 8 and 9 of the subsequent
list, and one that is not included in it. A few varieties of ground are dealt
withintheearlierportionofchap. IX,andthenchap. Xsetsforthsixnew
grounds, with six variations of plan to match. None of these is mentioned
again, though the ﬁrst is hardly to be distinguished from ground no. 4 in
the next chapter. At last, in chap. XI, we come to the Nine Grounds par
excellence, immediately followed by the variations. This takes us down
to ss. 14. In SS. 43-45, fresh deﬁnitions are provided for nos. 5, 6, 2,
8 and 9 (in the order given), as well as for the tenth ground noticed in
chap. VIII;andﬁnally,theninevariationsareenumeratedoncemorefrom
beginning to end, all, with the exception of 5, 6 and 7, being different
from those previously given. Though it is impossible to account for the
present state of Sun Tzu’s text, a few suggestive facts maybe brought into
prominence: (1) Chap. VIII, according to the title, should deal with nine
variations, whereas only ﬁve appear. (2) It is an abnormally short chapter.
(3) Chap. XI is entitled The Nine Grounds. Several of these are deﬁned
twice over, besides which there are two distinct lists of the corresponding
variations. (4) The length of the chapter is disproportionate, being double
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 108
that of any other except IX. I do not propose to draw any inferences from
these facts, beyond the general conclusion that Sun Tzu’s work cannot
have come down to us in the shape in which it left his hands: chap. VIII
is obviously defective and probably out of place, while XI seems to con-
tain matter that has either been added by a later hand or ought to appear
elsewhere.]
51. For it is the soldier’s disposition to offer an obstinate resistance when sur-
rounded, to ﬁght hard when he cannot help himself, and to obey promptly
when he has fallen into danger.
[Chang Yu alludes to the conduct of Pan Ch‘ao’s devoted followers in 73
A.D. The story runs thus in the HOU HAN SHU, ch. 47: "When Pan
Ch‘ao arrived at Shan-shan, Kuang, the King of the country, received him
at ﬁrst with great politeness and respect; but shortly afterwards his be-
havior underwent a sudden change, and he became remiss and negligent.
Pan Ch‘ao spoke about this to the ofﬁcers of his suite: ’Have you no-
ticed,’ he said, ’that Kuang’s polite intentions are on the wane? This must
signifythatenvoyshavecomefromtheNorthernbarbarians,andthatcon-
sequently he is in a state of indecision, not knowing with which side to
throw in his lot. That surely is the reason. The truly wise man, we are
told, can perceive things before they have come to pass; how much more,
then,thosethatarealreadymanifest!’ Thereuponhecalledoneofthenat-
ives who had been assigned to his service, and set a trap for him, saying:
’WherearethoseenvoysfromtheHsiung-nuwhoarrivedsomedayago?’
The man was so taken aback that between surprise and fear he presently
blurted out the whole truth. Pan Ch‘ao, keeping his informant carefully
under lock and key, then summoned a general gathering of his ofﬁcers,
thirty-sixinall,andbegandrinkingwiththem. Whenthewinehadmoun-
ted into their heads a little, he tried to rouse their spirit still further by
addressing them thus: ’Gentlemen, here we are in the heart of an isolated
region,anxioustoachieverichesandhonorbysomegreatexploit. Nowit
happens that an ambassador from the Hsiung-no arrived in this kingdom
onlyafewdaysago,andtheresultisthattherespectfulcourtesyextended
towards us by our royal host has disappeared. Should this envoy prevail
upon him to seize our party and hand us over to the Hsiung-no, our bones
will become food for the wolves of the desert. What are we to do?’ With
one accord, the ofﬁcers replied: ’Standing as we do in peril of our lives,
we will follow our commander through life and death.’ For the sequel of
this adventure, see chap. XII. ss. 1, note.]
52. We cannot enter into alliance with neighboring princes until we are ac-
quaintedwiththeirdesigns. Wearenotﬁttoleadanarmyonthemarchun-
lesswearefamiliarwiththefaceofthecountry–itsmountainsandforests,
its pitfalls and precipices, its marshes and swamps. We shall be unable to
turn natural advantages toaccount unless we make use of local guides.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 109
[These three sentences are repeated from VII. SS. 12-14 – in order to em-
phasize their importance, the commentators seem to think. I prefer to
regard them as interpolated here in order to form an antecedent to the fol-
lowingwords. Withregardtolocalguides,SunTzumighthaveaddedthat
there is always the risk of going wrong, either through their treachery or
somemisunderstandingsuchasLivyrecords(XXII.13): Hannibal,weare
told,orderedaguidetoleadhimintotheneighborhoodofCasinum,where
there was an important pass to be occupied; but his Carthaginian accent,
unsuited to the pronunciation of Latin names, caused the guide to under-
standCasilinuminsteadofCasinum,andturningfromhisproperroute,he
tookthearmyinthatdirection,themistakenotbeingdiscovereduntilthey
had almost arrived.]
53. To be ignored of any one of the following four or ﬁve principles does not
beﬁt a warlike prince.
54. When a warlike prince attacks a powerful state, his generalship shows it-
self in preventing the concentration of the enemy’s forces. He overawes
his opponents, and their allies are prevented from joining against him.
[MeiTao-ch‘enconstructsoneofthechainsofreasoningthataresomuch
affected by the Chinese: "In attacking a powerful state, if you can divide
her forces, you will have a superiority in strength; if you have a superi-
ority in strength, you will overawe the enemy; if you overawe the enemy,
the neighboring states will be frightened; and if the neighboring states are
frightened,theenemy’sallieswillbepreventedfromjoiningher."Thefol-
lowinggivesastrongermeaning: "Ifthegreatstatehasoncebeendefeated
(before she has had time to summon her allies), then the lesser states will
hold aloof and refrain from massing their forces." Ch‘en Hao and Chang
Yu take the sentence in quite another way. The former says: "Powerful
though a prince may be, if he attacks a large state, he will be unable to
raise enough troops, and must rely to some extent on external aid; if he
dispenseswiththis,andwithoverweeningconﬁdenceinhisownstrength,
simplytriestointimidatetheenemy,hewillsurelybedefeated."ChangYu
puts his view thus: "If we recklessly attack a large state, our own people
will be discontented and hang back. But if (as will then be the case) our
display of military force is inferior by half to that of the enemy, the other
chieftains will take fright and refuse to join us."]
55. Hence he does not strive to ally himself with all and sundry, nor does he
foster the power of other states. He carries out his own secret designs,
keeping his antagonists inawe.
[The train of thought, as said by Li Ch‘uan, appears to be this: Secure
against a combination of his enemies, "he can afford to reject entangling
alliancesandsimplypursuehisownsecretdesigns,hisprestigeenablehim
to dispense with external friendships."]
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 110
Thus he is able to capturetheir cities and overthrow their kingdoms.
[Thisparagraph,thoughwrittenmanyyearsbeforetheCh‘inStatebecame
aseriousmenace,isnotabadsummaryofthepolicybywhichthefamous
Six Chancellors gradually paved the way for her ﬁnal triumph under Shih
Huang Ti. Chang Yu, following up his previous note, thinks that Sun
Tzu is condemning this attitude of cold-blooded selﬁshness and haughty
isolation.]
56. Bestow rewards without regard to rule,
[Wu Tzu (ch. 3) less wisely says: "Let advance be richly rewarded and
retreat be heavily punished."]
issue orders
[Literally, "hang" or post up."]
without regard to previous arrangements;
["In order to prevent treachery," says Wang Hsi. The general meaning
is made clear by Ts‘ao Kung’s quotation from the SSU-MA FA: "Give
instructions only on sighting the enemy; give rewards when you see de-
servingdeeds."Ts‘aoKung’sparaphrase: "Theﬁnalinstructionsyougive
to your army should not correspond with those that have been previously
posted up." Chang Yu simpliﬁes this into "your arrangements should not
be divulged beforehand." And Chia Lin says: "there should be no ﬁxity
in your rules and arrangements." Not only is there danger in letting your
plans be known, but war often necessitates the entire reversal of them at
the last moment.]
andyouwillbeabletohandleawholearmyasthoughyouhadtodowith
but a single man. [Cf. supra, ss. 34.]
57. Confront your soldiers with the deed itself; never let them know your
design.
[Literally, "do not tell them words;" i.e. do not give your reasons for any
order. LordMansﬁeldoncetoldajuniorcolleagueto"givenoreasons"for
his decisions, and the maxim is even more applicable to a general than to
a judge.]
Whentheoutlookisbright,bringitbeforetheireyes;buttellthemnothing
when the situation is gloomy.
58. Placeyourarmyindeadlyperil,anditwillsurvive;plungeitintodesperate
straits, and it will comeoff in safety.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 111
[These words of Sun Tzu were once quoted by Han Hsin in explanation
of the tactics he employed in one of his most brilliant battles, already al-
luded to on p. 28. In 204 B.C., he was sent against the army of Chao,
and halted ten miles from the mouth of the Ching-hsing pass, where the
enemy had mustered in full force. Here, at midnight, he detached a body
of 2000 light cavalry, every man of which was furnished with a red ﬂag.
Theirinstructionsweretomaketheirwaythroughnarrowdeﬁlesandkeep
asecretwatchontheenemy. "WhenthemenofChaoseemeinfullﬂight,"
HanHsinsaid,"theywillabandontheirfortiﬁcationsandgivechase. This
must be the sign for you to rush in, pluck down the Chao standards and
set up the red banners of Han in their stead." Turning then to his other
ofﬁcers, he remarked: "Our adversary holds a strong position, and is not
likely to come out and attack us until he sees the standard and drums of
the commander-in-chief, for fear I should turn back and escape through
the mountains." So saying, he ﬁrst of all sent out a division consisting of
10,000 men, and ordered them to form in line of battle with their backs to
the River Ti. Seeing this maneuver, the whole army of Chao broke into
loud laughter. By this time it was broad daylight, and Han Hsin, display-
ing the generalissimo’s ﬂag, marched out of the pass with drums beating,
andwasimmediatelyengagedbytheenemy. Agreatbattlefollowed,last-
ing for some time; until at length Han Hsin and his colleague Chang Ni,
leaving drums and banner on the ﬁeld, ﬂed to the division on the river
bank, where another ﬁerce battle was raging. The enemy rushed out to
pursue them and to secure the trophies, thus denuding their ramparts of
men;butthetwogeneralssucceededinjoiningtheotherarmy,whichwas
ﬁghtingwiththeutmostdesperation. Thetimehadnowcomeforthe2000
horsemen to play their part. As soon as they saw the men of Chao fol-
lowing up their advantage, they galloped behind the deserted walls, tore
up the enemy’s ﬂags and replaced them by those of Han. When the Chao
armylookedbackfromthepursuit,thesightoftheseredﬂagsstruckthem
with terror. Convinced that the Hans had got in and overpowered their
king, they broke up in wild disorder, every effort of their leader to stay
the panic being in vain. Then the Han army fell on them from both sides
and completed the rout, killing a number and capturing the rest, amongst
whom was King Ya himself.... After the battle, some of Han Hsin’s of-
ﬁcers came to him and said: "In the ART OF WAR we are told to have
a hill or tumulus on the right rear, and a river or marsh on the left front.
[This appears to be a blend of Sun Tzu and T‘ai Kung. See IX ss. 9, and
note.] You, on the contrary, ordered us to draw up our troops with the
river at our back. Under these conditions, how did you manage to gain
the victory?" The general replied: "I fear you gentlemen have not stud-
ied the Art of War with sufﬁcient care. Is it not written there: ’Plunge
your army into desperate straits and it will come off in safety; place it in
deadly peril and it will survive’? Had I taken the usual course, I should
neverhavebeenabletobringmycolleagueround. WhatsaystheMilitary
Classic–’Swoopdownonthemarket-placeanddrivethemenofftoﬁght.’
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 112
[This passage does not occur in the present text of Sun Tzu.] If I had not
placed my troops in a position where they were obliged to ﬁght for their
lives, but had allowed each man to follow his own discretion, there would
have been a general debandade, and it would have been impossible to do
anything with them." The ofﬁcers admitted the force of his argument, and
said: "Thesearehighertacticsthanweshouldhavebeencapableof."[See
CH‘IEN HAN SHU, ch. 34, ff. 4, 5.] ]
59. For it is precisely when a force has fallen into harm’s way that is capable
of striking a blow for victory.
[Danger has a bracing effect.]
60. Successinwarfareisgainedbycarefullyaccommodatingourselvestothe
enemy’s purpose.
[Ts‘ao Kung says: "Feign stupidity"–by an appearance of yielding and
falling in with the enemy’s wishes. Chang Yu’s note makes the meaning
clear: "If the enemy shows an inclination to advance, lure him on to do
so; if he is anxious to retreat, delay on purpose that he may carry out his
intention."The objectisto makehim remissandcontemptuous beforewe
deliver our attack.]
61. By persistently hanging on the enemy’s ﬂank,
[Iunderstandtheﬁrstfourwordstomean"accompanyingtheenemyinone
direction." Ts‘ao Kung says: "unite the soldiers and make for the enemy."
But such a violent displacement of characters is quite indefensible.]
we shall succeed in the long run
[Literally, "after a thousand LI."]
in killing the commander-in-chief.
[Always a great point withthe Chinese.]
62. This is called ability to accomplish a thing by sheer cunning.
63. On the day that you take up your command, block the frontier passes,
destroy the ofﬁcial tallies,
[These were tablets of bamboo or wood, one half of which was issued as
a permit or passport by the ofﬁcial in charge of a gate. Cf. the "border-
warden" of LUN YU III. 24, who may have had similar duties. When this
half was returned to him, within a ﬁxed period, he was authorized to open
the gate and let the traveler through.]
and stop the passage of allemissaries.
[Either to or from the enemy’s country.]
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 113
64. Be stern in the council-chamber,
[Show no weakness, and insist on your plans being ratiﬁed by the sover-
eign.]
so that you may control thesituation.
[MeiYao-ch‘enunderstandsthewholesentencetomean: Takethestrictest
precautions to ensure secrecy in your deliberations.]
65. If the enemy leaves adoor open, you must rush in.
66. Forestallyouropponentbyseizingwhatheholdsdear,[Cf. supra,ss. 18.]
and subtly contrive to timehis arrival on the ground.
[Ch‘en Hao‘s explanation: "If I manage to seize a favorable position, but
the enemy does not appear on the scene, the advantage thus obtained can-
notbeturnedtoanypracticalaccount. Hewhointendstherefore,tooccupy
a position of importance to the enemy, must begin by making an artful
appointment, so to speak, with his antagonist, and cajole him into going
there as well." Mei Yao-ch‘en explains that this "artful appointment" is to
be made through the medium of the enemy’s own spies, who will carry
back just the amount of information that we choose to give them. Then,
havingcunninglydisclosedourintentions,"wemustmanage,thoughstart-
ing after the enemy, to arrive before him (VII. ss. 4). We must start after
him in order to ensure his marching thither; we must arrive before him in
ordertocapturetheplacewithouttrouble. Takenthus,thepresentpassage
lends some support to MeiYao-ch‘en’s interpretation of ss. 47.]
67. Walk in the path deﬁned by rule,
[Chia Lin says: "Victory is the only thing that matters, and this cannot
be achieved by adhering to conventional canons." It is unfortunate that
this variant rests on very slight authority, for the sense yielded is certainly
much more satisfactory. Napoleon, as we know, according to the veterans
of the old school whom he defeated, won his battles by violating every
accepted canon of warfare.]
and accommodate yourself to the enemy until you can ﬁght a decisive
battle.
[Tu Mu says: "Conform to the enemy’s tactics until a favorable opportun-
ity offers; then come forth and engage in a battle that shall prove decis-
ive."]
68. At ﬁrst, then, exhibit the coyness of a maiden, until the enemy gives you
an opening; afterwards emulate the rapidity of a running hare, and it will
be too late for the enemy to oppose you.
CHAPTER 12. THE NINE SITUATIONS 114
[As the hare is noted for its extreme timidity, the comparison hardly ap-
pearsfelicitous. ButofcourseSunTzuwasthinkingonlyofitsspeed. The
wordshavebeentakentomean: Youmustﬂeefromtheenemyasquickly
as an escaping hare; but this is rightly rejected by Tu Mu.]
Chapter 13
THE ATTACK BY FIRE
[Rather more than half the chapter (SS. 1-13) is devoted to the subject of ﬁre, after
which the author branches off into other topics.]
1. Sun Tzu said: There are ﬁve ways of attacking with ﬁre. The ﬁrst is to
burn soldiers in their camp;
[So Tu Mu. Li Ch‘uan says: "Set ﬁre to the camp, and kill the soldiers"
(whentheytrytoescapefromtheﬂames). PanCh‘ao,sentonadiplomatic
mission to the King of Shan-shan [see XI. ss. 51, note], found himself
placed in extreme peril by the unexpected arrival of an envoy from the
Hsiung-nu [the mortal enemies of the Chinese]. In consultation with his
ofﬁcers, he exclaimed: "Never venture, never win!1The only course
opentousnowisto make anassaultbyﬁreonthebarbariansundercover
of night, when they will not be able to discern our numbers. Proﬁting
by their panic, we shall exterminate them completely; this will cool the
King’s courage and cover us with glory, besides ensuring the success of
our mission.’ the ofﬁcers all replied that it would be necessary to discuss
the matter ﬁrst with the Intendant. Pan Ch‘ao then fell into a passion:
’It is today,’ he cried, ’that our fortunes must be decided! The Intendant
is only a humdrum civilian, who on hearing of our project will certainly
be afraid, and everything will be brought to light. An inglorious death is
no worthy fate for valiant warriors.’ All then agreed to do as he wished.
Accordingly,assoonasnightcameon,heandhislittlebandquicklymade
their way to the barbarian camp. A strong gale was blowing at the time.
Pan Ch‘ao ordered ten of the party to take drums and hide behind the
enemy’s barracks, it being arranged that when they saw ﬂames shoot up,
they should begin drumming and yelling with all their might. The rest of
his men, armed with bows and crossbows, he posted in ambuscade at the
gate of the camp. He then set ﬁre to the place from the windward side,
whereupon a deafening noise of drums and shouting arose on the front
1"Unless you enter the tiger’s lair, you cannot get hold of the tiger’s cubs."
115
CHAPTER 13. THE ATTACK BY FIRE 116
and rear of the Hsiung-nu, who rushed out pell-mell in frantic disorder.
Pan Ch‘ao slew three of them with his own hand, while his companions
cut off the heads of the envoy and thirty of his suite. The remainder, more
than a hundred in all, perished in the ﬂames. On the following day, Pan
Ch‘ao, divining his thoughts, said with uplifted hand: ’Although you did
not go with us last night, I should not think, Sir, of taking sole credit for
our exploit.’ This satisﬁed Kuo Hsun, and Pan Ch‘ao, having sent for
Kuang, King of Shan-shan, showed him the head of the barbarian envoy.
Thewholekingdomwasseizedwithfearandtrembling,whichPanCh‘ao
took steps to allay by issuing a public proclamation. Then, taking the
king’s sons as hostage, he returned to make his report to Tou Ku." HOU
HAN SHU, ch. 47, ff. 1, 2.] ]
the second is to burn stores;
[Tu Mu says: "Provisions, fuel and fodder." In order to subdue the rebel-
lious population of Kiangnan, Kao Keng recommended Wen Ti of the Sui
dynasty to make periodical raids and burn their stores of grain, a policy
which in the long run proved entirely successful.]
the third is to burn baggagetrains;
[An example given is the destruction of Yuan Shao‘s wagons and impedi-
menta by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in 200 A.D.]
the fourth is to burn arsenals and magazines;
[Tu Mu says that the things contained in "arsenals" and "magazines" are
the same. He speciﬁes weapons and other implements, bullion and cloth-
ing. Cf. VII. ss. 11.]
the ﬁfth is to hurl droppingﬁre amongst the enemy.
[Tu Yu says in the T‘UNG TIEN: "To drop ﬁre into the enemy’s camp.
Themethodbywhichthismaybedoneistosetthetipsofarrowsalightby
dippingthemintoabrazier,andthenshootthemfrompowerfulcrossbows
into the enemy’s lines."]
2. In order to carry out anattack, we must have means available.
[T‘saoKungthinksthat"traitorsintheenemy’scamp"arereferredto. But
Ch‘en Hao is more likely to be right in saying: "We must have favorable
circumstances in general, not merely traitors to help us." Chia Lin says:
"We must avail ourselves of wind and dry weather."]
the material for raising ﬁre should always be kept in readiness.
[TuMusuggestsasmaterialformakingﬁre: "dryvegetablematter,reeds,
brushwood,straw,grease,oil,etc."Herewehavethematerialcause. Chang
Yu says: "vessels for hoarding ﬁre, stuff for lighting ﬁres."]
CHAPTER 13. THE ATTACK BY FIRE 117
3. There is a proper season for making attacks with ﬁre, and special days for
starting a conﬂagration.
4. The proper season is when the weather is very dry; the special days are
those when the moon is in the constellations of the Sieve, the Wall, the
Wing or the Cross-bar;
[These are, respectively, the 7th, 14th, 27th, and 28th of the Twenty-eight
Stellar Mansions, corresponding roughly to Sagittarius, Pegasus, Crater
and Corvus.]
for these four are all daysof rising wind.
5. In attacking with ﬁre, one should be prepared to meet ﬁve possible devel-
opments:
6. (1) When ﬁre breaks out inside to enemy’s camp, respond at once with an
attack from without.
7. (2) If there is an outbreak of ﬁre, but the enemy’s soldiers remain quiet,
bide your time and do not attack.
[The prime object of attacking with ﬁre is to throw the enemy into con-
fusion. If this effect is not produced, it means that the enemy is ready to
receive us. Hence the necessity for caution.]
8. (3) When the force of the ﬂames has reached its height, follow it up with
an attack, if that is practicable; if not, stay where you are.
[Ts‘ao Kung says: "If you see a possible way, advance; but if you ﬁnd the
difﬁculties too great, retire."]
9. (4) If it is possible to make an assault with ﬁre from without, do not wait
for it to break out within, but deliver your attack at a favorable moment.
[TuMusaysthatthepreviousparagraphshadreferencetotheﬁrebreaking
out(eitheraccidentally,wemaysuppose,orbytheagencyofincendiaries)
insidetheenemy’scamp. "But,"hecontinues,"iftheenemyissettledina
waste place littered with quantities of grass, or if he has pitched his camp
in a position which can be burnt out, we must carry our ﬁre against him
at any seasonable opportunity, and not await on in hopes of an outbreak
occurring within, for fear our opponents should themselves burn up the
surrounding vegetation, and thus render our own attempts fruitless." The
famous Li Ling once bafﬂed the leader of the Hsiung-nu in this way. The
latter,takingadvantageofafavorablewind,triedtosetﬁretotheChinese
general’scamp,butfoundthateveryscrapofcombustiblevegetationinthe
neighborhood had already been burnt down. On the other hand, Po-ts‘ai,
a general of the Yellow Turban rebels, was badly defeated in 184 A.D.
throughhisneglectofthissimpleprecaution. "Attheheadofalargearmy
he was besieging Ch‘ang-she, which was held by Huang-fu Sung. The
CHAPTER 13. THE ATTACK BY FIRE 118
garrison was very small, and a general feeling of nervousness pervaded
theranks;soHuang-fuSungcalledhisofﬁcerstogetherandsaid: "Inwar,
there are various indirect methods of attack, and numbers do not count
for everything. [The commentator here quotes Sun Tzu, V. SS. 5, 6 and
10.] Now the rebels have pitched their camp in the midst of thick grass
which will easily burn when the wind blows. If we set ﬁre to it at night,
they will be thrown into a panic, and we can make a sortie and attack
them on all sides at once, thus emulating the achievement of T‘ien Tan.’
[See p. 90.] That same evening, a strong breeze sprang up; so Huang-fu
Sung instructed his soldiers to bind reeds together into torches and mount
guardonthecitywalls,afterwhichhesentoutabandofdaringmen,who
stealthily made their way through the lines and started the ﬁre with loud
shouts and yells. Simultaneously, a glare of light shot up from the city
walls, and Huang-fu Sung, sounding his drums, led a rapid charge, which
threw the rebels into confusion and put them to headlong ﬂight." [HOU
HAN SHU, ch. 71.] ]
10. (5) When you start a ﬁre, be to windward of it. Do not attack from the
leeward.
[ChangYu,followingTuYu,says: "Whenyoumakeaﬁre,theenemywill
retreat away from it; if you oppose his retreat and attack him then, he will
ﬁght desperately, which will not conduce to your success." A rather more
obvious explanation is given by Tu Mu: "If the wind is in the east, begin
burning to the east of the enemy, and follow up the attack yourself from
that side. If you start the ﬁre on the east side, and then attack from the
west, you will suffer in thesame way as your enemy."]
11. A wind that rises inthe daytime lasts long, but a night breeze soon falls.
[Cf. Lao Tzu’s saying: "A violent wind does not last the space of a morn-
ing." (TAO TE CHING, chap. 23.) Mei Yao-ch‘en and Wang Hsi say: "A
day breeze dies down at nightfall, and a night breeze at daybreak. This
is what happens as a general rule." The phenomenon observed may be
correct enough, but how thissense is to be obtained is not apparent.]
12. In every army, the ﬁve developments connected with ﬁre must be known,
the movements of the stars calculated, and a watch kept for the proper
days.
[Tu Mu says: "We must make calculations as to the paths of the stars,
and watch for the days on which wind will rise, before making our attack
with ﬁre." Chang Yu seems to interpret the text differently: "We must not
only know how to assail our opponents with ﬁre, but also be on our guard
against similar attacksfrom them."]
13. Hence those who use ﬁre as an aid to the attack show intelligence; those
who use water as an aid tothe attack gain an accession of strength.
CHAPTER 13. THE ATTACK BY FIRE 119
14. Bymeansofwater,anenemymaybeintercepted,butnotrobbedofallhis
belongings.
[Ts‘ao Kung’s note is: "We can merely obstruct the enemy’s road or di-
vide his army, but not sweep away all his accumulated stores." Water can
do useful service, but it lacks the terrible destructive power of ﬁre. This is
the reason, Chang Yu concludes, why the former is dismissed in a couple
ofsentences,whereastheattackbyﬁreisdiscussedindetail. WuTzu(ch.
4)speaksthusofthetwoelements: "Ifanarmyisencampedonlow-lying
marshy ground, from which the water cannot run off, and where the rain-
fall is heavy, it may be submerged by a ﬂood. If an army is encamped in
wildmarshlandsthicklyovergrownwithweedsandbrambles,andvisited
by frequent gales, it may beexterminated by ﬁre."]
15. Unhappy is the fate of one who tries to win his battles and succeed in his
attackswithoutcultivatingthespiritofenterprise;fortheresultiswasteof
time and general stagnation.
[ThisisoneofthemostperplexingpassagesinSunTzu. Ts‘aoKungsays:
"Rewards for good service should not be deferred a single day." And Tu
Mu: "If you do not take opportunity to advance and reward the deserving,
yoursubordinateswillnotcarryoutyourcommands,anddisasterwillen-
sue." For several reasons, however, and in spite of the formidable array
of scholars on the other side, I prefer the interpretation suggested by Mei
Yao-ch‘en alone, whose words I will quote: "Those who want to make
sure of succeeding in their battles and assaults must seize the favorable
moments when they come and not shrink on occasion from heroic meas-
ures: that is to say, they must resort to such means of attack of ﬁre, water
andthelike. Whattheymustnotdo,andwhatwillprovefatal,istositstill
and simply hold to the advantages they have got."]
16. Hence the saying: The enlightened ruler lays his plans well ahead; the
good general cultivates his resources.
[Tu Mu quotes the following from the SAN LUEH, ch. 2: "The warlike
prince controls his soldiers by his authority, kits them together by good
faith, and by rewards makes them serviceable. If faith decays, there will
be disruption; if rewards are deﬁcient, commands will not be respected."]
17. Move not unless you see an advantage; use not your troops unless there is
something to be gained; ﬁght not unless the position is critical.
[SunTzumayattimesappeartobeover-cautious,buthenevergoessofar
inthatdirectionastheremarkablepassageintheTAOTECHING,ch. 69.
"I dare not take the initiative, but prefer to act on the defensive; I dare not
advance an inch, but prefer to retreat a foot."]
18. No ruler should put troops into the ﬁeld merely to gratify his own spleen;
no general should ﬁght a battle simply out of pique.
CHAPTER 13. THE ATTACK BY FIRE 120
19. Ifitistoyouradvantage,makeaforwardmove;ifnot,staywhereyouare.
[This is repeated from XI. ss. 17. Here I feel convinced that it is an
interpolation, for it is evident that ss. 20 ought to follow immediately on
ss. 18.]
20. Anger may in time change to gladness; vexation may be succeeded by
content.
21. But a kingdom that has once been destroyed can never come again into
being;
[The Wu State was destined to be a melancholy example of this saying.]
nor can the dead ever be brought back to life.
22. Hence the enlightened ruler is heedful, and the good general full of cau-
tion. This is the way to keep a country at peace and an army intact.
Chapter 14
THE USE OF SPIES
1. Sun Tzu said: Raising a host of a hundred thousand men and marching
them great distances entails heavy loss on the people and a drain on the
resources of the State. The daily expenditure will amount to a thousand
ounces of silver. [Cf. II. ss. ss. 1, 13, 14.]
There will be commotion at home and abroad, and men will drop down
exhausted on the highways.
[Cf. TAOTECHING,ch. 30: "Wheretroopshavebeenquartered,brambles
andthornsspringup. ChangYuhasthenote: "Wemayberemindedofthe
saying: ’On serious ground, gather in plunder.’ Why then should carriage
andtransportationcauseexhaustiononthehighways?–Theansweris,that
notvictualsalone,butallsortsofmunitionsofwarhavetobeconveyedto
thearmy. Besides,theinjunctionto’forageontheenemy’onlymeansthat
when an army is deeply engaged in hostile territory, scarcity of food must
beprovidedagainst. Hence,withoutbeingsolelydependentontheenemy
for corn, we must forage in order that there may be an uninterrupted ﬂow
ofsupplies. Then,again,thereareplaceslikesaltdesertswhereprovisions
being unobtainable, supplies from home cannot be dispensed with."]
As many as seven hundred thousand families will be impeded in their
labor.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "Men will be lacking at the plough- tail." The al-
lusion is to the system of dividing land into nine parts, each consisting of
about15acres,theplotinthecenterbeingcultivatedonbehalfoftheState
by the tenants of the other eight. It was here also, so Tu Mu tells us, that
their cottages were built and a well sunk, to be used by all in common.
[See II. ss. 12, note.] In time of war, one of the families had to serve in
the army, while the other seven contributed to its support. Thus, by a levy
of 100,000 men (reckoning one able- bodied soldier to each family) the
husbandry of 700,000 families would be affected.]
121
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 122
2. Hostilearmiesmayfaceeachotherforyears,strivingforthevictorywhich
is decided in a single day. This being so, to remain in ignorance of the
enemy’s condition simply because one grudges the outlay of a hundred
ounces of silver in honors and emoluments,
["For spies" is of course the meaning, though it would spoil the effect of
this curiously elaborate exordium if spies were actually mentioned at this
point.]
is the height of inhumanity.
[SunTzu’sagreementiscertainlyingenious. Hebeginsbyadvertingtothe
frightful misery and vast expenditure of blood and treasure which war al-
waysbringsinitstrain. Now,unlessyouarekeptinformedoftheenemy’s
condition, and are ready to strike at the right moment, a war may drag on
for years. The only way to get this information is to employ spies, and it
is impossible to obtain trustworthy spies unless they are properly paid for
their services. But it is surely false economy to grudge a comparatively
triﬂing amount for this purpose, when every day that the war lasts eats up
an incalculably greater sum. This grievous burden falls on the shoulders
of the poor, and hence Sun Tzu concludes that to neglect the use of spies
is nothing less than a crime against humanity.]
3. One who acts thus is no leader of men, no present help to his sovereign,
no master of victory.
[This idea, that the true object of war is peace, has its root in the na-
tional temperament of the Chinese. Even so far back as 597 B.C., these
memorable words were uttered by Prince Chuang of the Ch‘u State: "The
[Chinese] character for ’prowess’ is made up of [the characters for] ’to
stay’ and ’a spear’ (cessation of hostilities). Military prowess is seen in
therepressionofcruelty,thecallinginofweapons,thepreservationofthe
appointment of Heaven, the ﬁrm establishment of merit, the bestowal of
happiness on the people, putting harmony between the princes, the diffu-
sion of wealth."]
4. Thus, what enables the wise sovereign and the good general to strike and
conquer, and achieve things beyond the reach of ordinary men, is FORE-
KNOWLEDGE.
[That is, knowledge of the enemy’s dispositions, and what he means to
do.]
5. Now this foreknowledge cannot be elicited from spirits; it cannot be ob-
tained inductively from experience,
[TuMu’snoteis: "[knowledgeoftheenemy]cannotbegainedbyreason-
ing from other analogous cases."]
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 123
nor by any deductive calculation.
[LiCh‘uansays: "Quantitieslikelength,breadth,distanceandmagnitude,
are susceptible of exact mathematical determination; human actions can-
not be so calculated."]
6. Knowledge of the enemy’s dispositions can only be obtained from other
men.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en has rather an interesting note: "Knowledge of the spirit-
world is to be obtained by divination; information in natural science may
be sought by inductive reasoning; the laws of the universe can be veriﬁed
by mathematical calculation: but the dispositions of an enemy are ascer-
tainable through spies andspies alone."]
7. Hence the use of spies, of whom there are ﬁve classes:
(1) Local spies;
(2) inward spies;
(3) converted spies;
(4) doomed spies;
(5) surviving spies.
8. When these ﬁve kinds of spy are all at work, none can discover the secret
system. Thisiscalled"divinemanipulationofthethreads."Itisthesover-
eign’s most precious faculty.
[Cromwell, one of the greatest and most practical of all cavalry leaders,
had ofﬁcers styled ’scout masters,’ whose business it was to collect all
possible information regarding the enemy, through scouts and spies, etc.,
and much of his success in war was traceable to the previous knowledge
of the enemy’s moves thus gained."1]
9. Having LOCAL SPIES means employing the services of the inhabitants
of a district.
[TuMusays: "Intheenemy’scountry,winpeopleoverbykindtreatment,
and use them as spies."]
10. Having INWARD SPIES, making use of ofﬁcials of the enemy.
[Tu Mu enumerates the following classes as likely to do good service in
this respect: "Worthy men who have been degraded from ofﬁce, crimin-
als who have undergone punishment; also, favorite concubines who are
greedy for gold, men who are aggrieved at being in subordinate positions,
1"Aids to Scouting," p. 2.
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 124
or who have been passed over in the distribution of posts, others who are
anxious that their side should be defeated in order that they may have
a chance of displaying their ability and talents, ﬁckle turncoats who al-
ways want to have a foot in each boat. Ofﬁcials of these several kinds,"
he continues, "should be secretly approached and bound to one’s interests
by means of rich presents. In this way you will be able to ﬁnd out the
state of affairs in the enemy’s country, ascertain the plans that are being
formedagainstyou,andmoreoverdisturbtheharmonyandcreateabreach
between the sovereign and his ministers." The necessity for extreme cau-
tion, however, in dealing with "inward spies," appears from an historical
incident related by Ho Shih: "Lo Shang, Governor of I-Chou, sent his
general Wei Po to attack the rebel Li Hsiung of Shu in his stronghold at
P‘i. After each side had experienced a number of victories and defeats, Li
HsiunghadrecoursetotheservicesofacertainP‘o-t‘ai,anativeofWu-tu.
Hebegantohavehimwhippeduntilthebloodcame,andthensenthimoff
to Lo Shang, whom he was to delude by offering to cooperate with him
from inside the city, and to give a ﬁre signal at the right moment for mak-
ingageneralassault. LoShang,conﬁdinginthesepromises,marchoutall
his best troops, and placed Wei Po and others at their head with orders to
attack at P‘o-t‘ai’s bidding. Meanwhile, Li Hsiung’s general, Li Hsiang,
had prepared an ambuscade on their line of march; and P‘o-t‘ai, having
rearedlongscaling-laddersagainstthecitywalls,nowlightedthebeacon-
ﬁre. Wei Po’s men raced up on seeing the signal and began climbing the
laddersasfastastheycould,whileothersweredrawnupbyropeslowered
from above. More than a hundred of Lo Shang’s soldiers entered the city
in this way, every one of whom was forthwith beheaded. Li Hsiung then
chargedwithallhisforces,bothinsideandoutsidethecity,androutedthe
enemy completely." [This happened in 303 A.D. I do not know where Ho
Shih got the story from. It is not given in the biography of Li Hsiung or
that of his father Li T‘e, CHIN SHU, ch. 120, 121.]
11. HavingCONVERTEDSPIES,gettingholdoftheenemy’sspiesandusing
them for our own purposes.
[By means of heavy bribes and liberal promises detaching them from the
enemy’s service, and inducing them to carry back false information as
well as to spy in turn on their own countrymen. On the other hand, Hsiao
Shih-hsien says that we pretend not to have detected him, but contrive to
let him carry away a false impression of what is going on. Several of the
commentatorsacceptthisasanalternativedeﬁnition;butthatitisnotwhat
Sun Tzu meant is conclusively proved by his subsequent remarks about
treating the converted spy generously (ss. 21 sqq.). Ho Shih notes three
occasions on which converted spies were used with conspicuous success:
(1) by T‘ien Tan in his defense of Chi-mo (see supra, p. 90); (2) by Chao
She on his march to O-yu (see p. 57); and by the wily Fan Chu in 260
B.C., when Lien P‘o was conducting a defensive campaign against Ch‘in.
TheKingofChaostronglydisapprovedofLienP‘o’scautiousanddilatory
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 125
methods, which had been unable to avert a series of minor disasters, and
therefore lent a ready ear to the reports of his spies, who had secretly
gone over to the enemy and were already in Fan Chu’s pay. They said:
"The only thing which causes Ch‘in anxiety is lest Chao Kua should be
made general. Lien P‘o they consider an easy opponent, who is sure to be
vanquished in the long run." Now this Chao Kua was a sun of the famous
Chao She. From his boyhood, he had been wholly engrossed in the study
of war and military matters, until at last he came to believe that there was
no commander in the whole Empire who could stand against him. His
fatherwasmuchdisquietedbythisoverweeningconceit,andtheﬂippancy
withwhichhespokeofsuchaseriousthingaswar,andsolemnlydeclared
that if ever Kua was appointed general, he would bring ruin on the armies
of Chao. This was the man who, in spite of earnest protests from his own
mother and the veteran statesman Lin Hsiang-ju, was now sent to succeed
Lien P‘o. Needless to say, he proved no match for the redoubtable Po
Ch‘i and the great military power of Ch‘in. He fell into a trap by which
his army was divided into two and his communications cut; and after a
desperate resistance lasting 46 days, during which the famished soldiers
devoured one another, he was himself killed by an arrow, and his whole
force, amounting, it is said, to 400,000 men, ruthlessly put to the sword.]
12. HavingDOOMEDSPIES,doingcertainthingsopenlyforpurposesofde-
ception, and allowing our spies to know of them and report them to the
enemy.
[Tu Yu gives the best exposition of the meaning: "We ostentatiously do
thing calculated to deceive our own spies, who must be led to believe that
theyhavebeenunwittinglydisclosed. Then,whenthesespiesarecaptured
in the enemy’s lines, they will make an entirely false report, and the en-
emy will take measures accordingly, only to ﬁnd that we do something
quite different. The spies will thereupon be put to death." As an example
of doomed spies, Ho Shih mentions the prisoners released by Pan Ch‘ao
in his campaign against Yarkand. (See p. 132.) He also refers to T‘ang
Chien, who in 630 A.D. was sent by T‘ai Tsung to lull the Turkish Kahn
Chieh-liintofanciedsecurity,untilLiChingwasabletodeliveracrushing
blow against him. Chang Yu says that the Turks revenged themselves by
killing T‘ang Chien, but this is a mistake, for we read in both the old and
the New T‘ang History (ch. 58, fol. 2 and ch. 89, fol. 8 respectively)
thatheescapedandlivedonuntil656. LiI-chiplayedasomewhatsimilar
part in 203 B.C., when sent by the King of Han to open peaceful negoti-
ations with Ch‘i. He has certainly more claim to be described a "doomed
spy",forthekingofCh‘i,beingsubsequentlyattackedwithoutwarningby
Han Hsin, and infuriated by what he considered the treachery of Li I-chi,
ordered the unfortunate envoyto be boiled alive.]
13. SURVIVING SPIES, ﬁnally, are those who bring back news from the en-
emy’s camp.
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 126
[This is the ordinary class of spies, properly so called, forming a regu-
lar part of the army. Tu Mu says: "Your surviving spy must be a man of
keen intellect, though in outward appearance a fool; of shabby exterior,
but with a will of iron. He must be active, robust, endowed with physical
strength and courage; thoroughly accustomed to all sorts of dirty work,
able to endure hunger and cold, and to put up with shame and ignominy."
Ho Shih tells the following story of Ta‘hsi Wu of the Sui dynasty: "When
he was governor of Eastern Ch‘in, Shen-wu of Ch‘i made a hostile move-
ment upon Sha-yuan. The Emperor T‘ai Tsu [? Kao Tsu] sent Ta-hsi Wu
to spy upon the enemy. He was accompanied by two other men. All three
wereonhorsebackandworetheenemy’suniform. Whenitwasdark,they
dismountedafewhundredfeetawayfromtheenemy’scampandstealthily
crept up to listen, until they succeeded in catching the passwords used in
the army. Then they got on their horses again and boldly passed through
the camp under the guise of night-watchmen; and more than once, hap-
pening to come across a soldier who was committing some breach of dis-
cipline, they actually stopped to give the culprit a sound cudgeling! Thus
they managed to return with the fullest possible information about the en-
emy’s dispositions, and received warm commendation from the Emperor,
who in consequence of their report was able to inﬂict a severe defeat on
his adversary."]
14. Hence it is that which none in the whole army are more intimate relations
to be maintained than with spies.
[Tu Mu and Mei Yao-ch‘en point out that the spy is privileged to enter
even the general’s private sleeping-tent.]
None should be more liberally rewarded. In no other business should
greater secrecy be preserved.
[Tu Mu gives a graphic touch: all communication with spies should be
carried "mouth-to-ear." The following remarks on spies may be quoted
from Turenne, who made perhaps larger use of them than any previous
commander: "Spies are attached to those who give them most, he who
paysthemillisneverserved. Theyshouldneverbeknowntoanybody;nor
shouldtheyknowoneanother. Whentheyproposeanythingverymaterial,
securetheirpersons,orhaveinyourpossessiontheirwivesandchildrenas
hostages for their ﬁdelity. Never communicate anything to them but what
is absolutely necessary that they should know.2]
15. Spies cannot be usefully employed without a certain intuitive sagacity.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "In order to use them, one must know fact from
falsehood,andbeabletodiscriminatebetweenhonestyanddouble-dealing."
WangHsiinadifferentinterpretationthinksmorealongthelinesof"intu-
itiveperception"and"practicalintelligence."TuMustrangelyrefersthese
2"Marshal Turenne," p. 311.
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 127
attributes to the spies themselves: "Before using spies we must assure
ourselves as to their integrity of character and the extent of their experi-
ence and skill." But he continues: "A brazen face and a crafty disposition
are more dangerous than mountains or rivers; it takes a man of genius to
penetratesuch."Sothatweareleftinsomedoubtastohisrealopinionon
the passage."]
16. They cannot be properly managed without benevolence and straightfor-
wardness.
[ChangYusays: "Whenyouhaveattractedthembysubstantialoffers,you
must treat them with absolute sincerity; then they will work for you with
all their might."]
17. Without subtle ingenuity of mind, one cannot make certain of the truth of
their reports.
[Mei Yao-ch‘en says: "Be on your guard against the possibility of spies
going over to the service of the enemy."]
18. Be subtle! be subtle! and use your spies for every kind of business. [Cf.
VI. ss. 9.]
19. If a secret piece of news is divulged by a spy before the time is ripe, he
must be put to death together with the man to whom the secret was told.
[Word for word, the translation here is: "If spy matters are heard before
[our plans] are carried out," etc. Sun Tzu’s main point in this passage
is: Whereas you kill the spy himself "as a punishment for letting out the
secret," the object of killing the other man is only, as Ch‘en Hao puts it,
"tostophismouth"andpreventnewsleakinganyfurther. Ifithadalready
been repeated to others, this object would not be gained. Either way, Sun
Tzu lays himself open to the charge of inhumanity, though Tu Mu tries to
defend him by saying that the man deserves to be put to death, for the spy
would certainly not have told the secret unless the other had been at pains
to worm it out of him."]
20. Whether the object be to crush an army, to storm a city, or to assassinate
an individual, it is always necessary to begin by ﬁnding out the names of
the attendants, the aides-de- camp,
[Literally "visitors", is equivalent, as Tu Yu says, to "those whose duty it
is to keep the general supplied with information," which naturally neces-
sitates frequent interviews with him.]
and door-keepers and sentries of the general in command. Our spies must
be commissioned to ascertain these.
[As the ﬁrst step, no doubt towards ﬁnding out if any of these important
functionaries can be won over by bribery.]
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 128
21. Theenemy’sspieswhohavecometospyonusmustbesoughtout,temp-
tedwithbribes,ledawayandcomfortablyhoused. Thustheywillbecome
converted spies and available for our service.
22. Itisthroughtheinformationbroughtbytheconvertedspythatweareable
to acquire and employ local and inward spies.
[Tu Yu says: "through conversion of the enemy’s spies we learn the en-
emy’scondition."And ChangYusays: "Wemusttempt the convertedspy
into our service, because it is he that knows which of the local inhabitants
are greedy of gain, and whichof the ofﬁcials are open to corruption."]
23. It is owing to his information, again, that we can cause the doomed spy to
carry false tidings to theenemy.
[Chang Yu says, "because the converted spy knows how the enemy can
best be deceived."]
24. Lastly, it is by his information that the surviving spy can be used on ap-
pointed occasions.
25. The end and aim of spying in all its ﬁve varieties is knowledge of the
enemy;andthisknowledgecanonlybederived,intheﬁrstinstance,from
the converted spy.
[As explained in ss. 22-24. He not only brings information himself, but
makes it possible to use the other kinds of spy to advantage.]
Hence it is essential that the converted spy be treated with the utmost lib-
erality.
26. Of old, the rise of theYin dynasty
[Sun Tzu means the Shang dynasty, founded in 1766 B.C. Its name was
changed to Yin by P‘an Kengin 1401.
was due to I Chih
[Better known as I Yin, the famous general and statesman who took part
in Ch‘eng T‘ang’s campaignagainst Chieh Kuei.]
who had served under the Hsia. Likewise, the rise of the Chou dynasty
was due to Lu Ya
[Lu Shang rose to high ofﬁce under the tyrant Chou Hsin, whom he af-
terwards helped to overthrow. Popularly known as T‘ai Kung, a title be-
stowed on him by Wen Wang, he is said to have composed a treatise on
war, erroneously identiﬁedwith the LIU T‘AO.]
who had served under the Yin.
CHAPTER 14. THE USE OF SPIES 129
[There is less precision in the Chinese than I have thought it well to in-
troduce into my translation, and the commentaries on the passage are by
no means explicit. But, having regard to the context, we can hardly doubt
that Sun Tzu is holding up I Chih and Lu Ya as illustrious examples of
the converted spy, or something closely analogous. His suggestion is, that
the Hsia and Yin dynasties were upset owing to the intimate knowledge
of their weaknesses and shortcoming which these former ministers were
able to impart to the other side. Mei Yao-ch‘en appears to resent any such
aspersion on these historic names: "I Yin and Lu Ya," he says, "were not
rebels against the Government. Hsia could not employ the former, hence
Yin employed him. Yin could not employ the latter, hence Hou employed
him. Their great achievements were all for the good of the people." Ho
Shih is also indignant: "How should two divinely inspired men such as I
and Lu have acted as common spies? Sun Tzu’s mention of them simply
means that the proper use of the ﬁve classes of spies is a matter which
requires men of the highest mental caliber like I and Lu, whose wisdom
andcapacityqualiﬁedthemforthetask. Theabovewordsonlyemphasize
this point." Ho Shih believes then that the two heroes are mentioned on
account of their supposed skill in the use of spies. But this is very weak.]
27. Henceitisonlytheenlightenedrulerandthewisegeneralwhowillusethe
highest intelligence of the army for purposes of spying and thereby they
achieve great results.
[Tu Mu closes with a note of warning: "Just as water, which carries a
boat from bank to bank, may also be the means of sinking it, so reliance
on spies, while production of great results, is oft-times the cause of utter
destruction."]
Spies are a most important element in water, because on them depends an
army’s ability to move.
[ChiaLinsaysthatanarmywithoutspiesislikeamanwithearsoreyes.]
